=head1 NAME

References and Acknowledgments

=head1 Description

This document describes the resources used for writing this
documentation and acknowledges folks who directly and indirectly have
contributed to this documentation project.

=head1 Sources for this documentation

We have used the following references while writing this guide:

=over 4

=item *

B<mod_perl FAQ> by Frank Cringle (now merged inside the docs)

=item *

B<mod_perl performance tuning guide> by Vivek Khera (now merged inside
the docs)

=item *

B<mod_perl plugin reference guide> by Doug MacEachern (now merged
inside the docs)

=item *

B<Quick guide for moving from CGI to mod_perl> (now merged inside the
docs)

=item *

B<mod_perl_traps, common traps and solutions for mod_perl users> (now
merged inside the docs)

=item *

B<L<mod_perl mailing list|maillist::modperl> emails>. Answers to some
of the questions posted to Apache/Perl mailing list.

=back

I have quoted many snippets of information from FAQs and emails, but I
have not credited each quote in the guide individually.  I did not
mean to take the credit for myself, it's just that I tried to keep
track of names, and became lost, so instead of scattering credits
throughout the Guide I have gathered them all together here.  If you
want your name to show up under your original quote, please tell me
and I'll add it for you.

=head1 Major Contributors

=over 4

=item *

B<Doug MacEachern>. A large part of this guide is built upon his email
replies to users questions.

=item *

B<Frank Cringle>. Parts of his mod_perl FAQ have been used in this guide.

=item *

B<Vivek Khera>. For his mod_perl performance tuning guide. And lots of
useful comments on the list that made into the guide.

=item *

B<Steve Reppucci>, who did a thorough review of the stuff I wrote.  He
fixed lots of spelling and grammar errors, and made the guide readable
to English speakers :)

=item *

B<Eric Cholet>, who wrote complete sections for the guide, and pointed
out technical errors in it.

=item *

B<Ken Williams>, who reviewed a lot of stuff in the guide.  Many
snippets from his emails are included in the guide.

=item * 

B<Matt Sergeant>, who contributed the section "Exception Handling for
mod_perl" for the perl reference chapter and made many other
contributions.

=item *

B<Wesley Darlington> for contributing a big section for the scenario
chapter.

=item *

B<Geoffrey S Young> and B<David Harris> for contributing big sections
about mod_perl and RPM packages, and providing helpful comments and
corrections.

=item *

B<Andreas J. Koenig> for contributing his "Correct HTTP headers"
document.

=item *

B<Ged W. Haywood> for reviewing and fixing the whole guide, providing
lots of constructive criticisms and helping to reorganize the guide to
make it more user friendly.

=item *

B<Mark Summerfield> for reviewing and fixing all the guide's chapters,
improving guide's readability and suggesting useful extensions.

=item *

B<Jeffrey W. Baker> for his "guide to mod_perl database performance"
and many useful comments on the list that has been reused in the
guide's material.

=item *

B<Richard A. Wells> for reviewing and correcting a large part of the
guide.

=item *

B<Randy Harmon> for rewriting the mod_perl advocacy chapter

=item *

B<Dean Fitz> for reviewing the "Operating System and Hardware Demands"
chapter.

=back

=head1 A Bit Less Major Contributors

Alphabetically sorted:

=over

=item * Aaron Johnson

=item * Ajay Shah

=item * Alexander Farber

=item * Andreas J. Koenig

=item * Andreas Piesk

=item * Andrei A. Voropaev

=item * Andrew Ford

=item * Andrew McNaughton

=item * Anthony D. Ettinger

=item * Artur Zambrzycki

=item * Ask Bjoern Hansen

=item * Barrie Slaymaker

=item * Bill Moseley

=item * Boris Zentner

=item * Brian Moseley

=item * Carl Hansen

=item * Chad K. Lewis

=item * Chris Nokleberg

=item * Chris Winters

=item * Christof Damian

=item * Christophe Dupre

=item * Cliff Rayman

=item * Craig

=item * Daniel Bohling

=item * Daniel Koch

=item * Daniel W. Burke

=item * Darren Chamberlain

=item * Dave Hodgkinson

=item * Dave Rolsky

=item * David Harris

=item * David Huggins-Daines

=item * David Landgren

=item * David Mitchell

=item * DeWitt Clinton

=item * Dean Fitz

=item * Doug Bagley

=item * Doug Kyle

=item * Drew Taylor

=item * Ed Park

=item * Ed Phillips

=item * Edmund Mergl

=item * Edwin Pratomo

=item * Eric Cholet

=item * Eric Strovink

=item * Evan A. Zacks

=item * Ewan Edwards

=item * Frank Schoeters

=item * Garr Updegraff

=item * Ged Haywood

=item * Geoff Crawshaw

=item * Geoffrey Young

=item * Gerald Richter

=item * Gerd Knops

=item * Glenn

=item * Greg Cope

=item * Greg Stark

=item * Gunther Birznieks

=item * Hailei Dai

=item * Henrique Pantarotto

=item * Honza Pazdziora

=item * Howard Jones

=item * Hunter Monroe

=item * Ilya Obshadko

=item * Ime Smits

=item * Issac Goldstand

=item * James Furness

=item * James G Smith

=item * James W Walden

=item * Jan Peter Hecking

=item * Jason Bodnar

=item * Jason Rhinelander

=item * Jauder Ho

=item * Jay J

=item * Jean-Louis Guenego

=item * Jeff Chan

=item * Jeff Rowe

=item * Jeffrey W. Baker

=item * Jie Gao

=item * Joao Fonseca

=item * Joe Schaefer

=item * Joe Slag

=item * John Armstrong

=item * John Deighan

=item * John Hyland

=item * John Milton

=item * John Walker

=item * Jon Orwant

=item * Jonathan Peterson

=item * Joshua Chamas

=item * Karl Olson

=item * Kavitha

=item * Kees Vonk

=item * Ken Williams

=item * Kenny Gatdula

=item * Kevin Murphy

=item * Kevin Swope

=item * Lance Cleveland

=item * Larry Leszczynski

=item * Leslie Mikesell

=item * Lincoln Stein

=item * Louis Semprini

=item * Lupe Christoph

=item * Mads Toftum

=item * Marc Lehmann

=item * Marcel Grunauer

=item * Mark Mills

=item * Mark Summerfield

=item * Marko van der Puil

=item * Marshall Dudley

=item * Matt Sergeant

=item * Matthew Darwin

=item * Michael Blakeley

=item * Michael Finke

=item * Michael Hall

=item * Michael Rendell

=item * Michael Schout

=item * Michele Beltrame

=item * Mike Depot

=item * Mike Fletcher

=item * Mike MacKenzie

=item * Mike Miller

=item * Nancy Lin

=item * Nathan Torkington

=item * Nathan Vonnahme

=item * Neil Conway

=item * Nick Tonkin

=item * Oleg Bartunov

=item * Owen Williams

=item * Pascal Eeftinck

=item * Patrick

=item * Paul Buder

=item * Paul Cotter

=item * Pavel Shmidt

=item * Per Einar Ellefsen

=item * Perrin Harkins

=item * Peter Galbavy

=item * Peter Haworth

=item * Peter J. Schoenster

=item * Peter Skov

=item * Philip Jacob

=item * Philip Newton

=item * Radu Greab

=item * Rafael Garcia-Suarez

=item * Ralf Engelschall

=item * Randal L. Schwartz

=item * Randy Harmon

=item * Randy Kobes

=item * Rauznitz Balazs

=item * Rex Staples

=item * Richard A. Wells

=item * Richard Chen

=item * Richard Dice

=item * Richard More

=item * Rick Myers

=item * Robert Mathews

=item * Robin Berjon

=item * Rodger Donaldson

=item * Ron Pero

=item * Roy Nasser

=item * Salve J Nilsen

=item * Scott Fagg

=item * Scott Holdren

=item * Sean Dague

=item * Shane Nay

=item * Stephane Benoit

=item * Stephen Judd

=item * Steve Fink

=item * Steve Reppucci

=item * Steve Willer

=item * Surat Singh Bhati

=item * Terry West

=item * Tim Bunce

=item * Tim Noll

=item * Thomas Klausner

=item * Todd Finney

=item * Tom Brown

=item * Tom Christiansen

=item * Tom Hughes

=item * Tom Mornini

=item * Tuomas Salo

=item * Tzvetan Stoyanov

=item * Ulrich Neumerkel

=item * Ulrich Pfeifer

=item * Vivek Khera

=item * Ward Vandewege

=item * Wesley Darlington

=item * Will Trillich

=item * Yann Kerhervé

=item * Yann Ramin

=item * 

=item * Did I miss your name? Tell me!

=back

I want to thank all the people who donated their time and efforts to
make this amazing idea of mod_perl a reality. This includes Doug
MacEachern, the author of mod_perl, and all the developers who
contributed bug patches, modules and help. And of course the numerous
unseen users around the world who help to promote mod_perl and to make
it a better tool.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut
