=head1 NAME

mod_perl Articles in Printed and Online media

=head1 Description

There are many mod_perl articles published on the web and printed
media. This document tries to partially cover these resources.

If you know of any other resources not listed on this page please let
us know at the L<users|maillist::modperl> mailing list.

=head1 Printed Media

=over

=item *

C<The Perl Journal> has featured a number of mod_perl articles over
the years:

=over

=item *

Volume 3, Issue 1: I<Stately Scripting with mod_perl>, by Lincoln
Stein and Doug
MacEachern. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1285/sam03010001/

=item *

Volume 3, Issue 3: I<A Web Proxy module for mod_perl> by Lincoln
D. Stein. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1287/sam03030005/

=item *

Volume 3, Issue 3: I<Creating Applications with mod_perl and Apache>,
by Mike Fletcher. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1287/sam03030011/

=item *

Volume 3, Issue 4: I<A Dynamic Navigation Bar with mod_perl> by
Lincoln D. Stein. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1288/sam03040003/

=item *

Volume 3, Issue 4: I<Authentication with mod_perl>, by Michael
Parker. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1288/sam03040004/

=item *

Volume 4, Issue 4: I<Managing Streaming Audio>, by Lincoln
D. Stein. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1275/sam04040005/

=item *

Volume 5, Issue 4: I<Developing Wireless Applications>, by Dan
Brian. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1131/sam05040004/

=item *

Volume 5, Issue 5: I<Using a Cleanup Handler in mod_perl>, by Jim
Woodgate. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1337/sam05050003/

=back

=item *

C<Sys Admin Magazine>. I<Getting Your Message Across with Apache>, by
Carlos Ramirez. http://www.samag.com/documents/s=1153/sam0103a/

=item *

C<DBMS>, November 1997. I<Connecting Sybase to the Web>, by I<Brian
Jepson>: http://www.dbmsmag.com/9711i14.html

=item *

C<BYTE>, March 1998. I<Perl and Apache>, by I<Jon Udell>.
http://www.byte.com/art/9803/sec7/art1.htm .

=item *

C<The Linux Journal>, I<At the Forge: Combining Apache and Perl>, by
I<Reuven M. Lerner> (among others). I<At the Forge> has a website at
http://www.lerner.co.il/atf/ where you can read all the back issues and
get the source code. Many articles involve mod_perl.

=item *

Linux Magazin (german), I<Bis in den roten Bereich> - Examples on
performance test scripts to see the modperl benefits:
http://www.linux-magazin.de/Artikel/ausgabe/1998/08/Pounder/pounder.html .

=back

=head1 Online Zines

=over

=item *

mod_perl articles at Perl.com

http://www.perl.com/pub/q/Article_Archive#mod_perl (better use search
and you will find other mod_perl articles which weren't catalogued
under mod_perl category)

Articles by David E. Wheeler: http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/au/1059

=item *

articles at take23.org: http://take23.org/articles/

=item *

mod_perl series at ApacheToday (now WWW.ServerWatch.com)
http://apachetoday.com/search.php3?author=Stas:Bekman

=item *

mod_perl series at ApacheWeek http://www.apacheweek.com/

=item *

mod_perl series at Developer Shed http://www.devshed.com/Server_Side/Perl

=item *

Basic knowledge about Apache stages and mod_perl handlers article in
German. http://www.heise.de/ix/artikel/2000/01/156/

=item *

Webmonkey (http://www.webmonkey.com ) features some web tutorials
where they use mod_perl: They have an "intro to mod_perl":
http://hotwired.lycos.com/webmonkey/98/38/index2a.html?tw=perl and
"Choosing the right database system" uses mod_perl and ePerl:
http://hotwired.lycos.com/webmonkey/backend/databases/tutorials/tutorial1.html
.

=item *

Linux Journal ( http://www.linuxjournal.com/ ) features an article
called "Web watch: Catching Spiders with Bottrap" in which the authour
introduces Bottrap, a mod_perl module used to vut off crawlers and
bots.  http://www.linuxjournal.com/article.php?sid=5861

=item *

Randal L. Schwartz regularly puts his columns online, all of them
dealing with Perl, many with CGI, and some with mod_perl. See
http://www.stonehenge.com/merlyn/WebTechniques/ ,
http://www.stonehenge.com/merlyn/UnixReview/ ,
http://www.stonehenge.com/merlyn/LinuxMag/ .

=item * 

I<Scaling mod_perl>: http://www.lifespree.com/modperl/

=item *

I<Web Developer's Virtual Library> have introductions to mod_perl. See
http://www.wdvl.com/Authoring/Languages/Perl/PerlfortheWeb/index12.html ,
http://www.wdvl.com/Authoring/Languages/Perl/PerlfortheWeb/index13.html
and
http://www.wdvl.com/Authoring/Languages/Perl/PerlfortheWeb/index14.html .

=item *

I<Stopping Spambots: A Spambot Trap>, by Neil
Gunton. http://www.neilgunton.com/spambot_trap/

=item *

C<O'Reilly Network>: I<Installing mod_perl from RPM>, by Stephen
Figgins. http://www.onlamp.com/pub/a/apache/2000/03/17/modperl.html

=item *

C<LinuxWorld.com>: I<Netscape Navigator's roaming profiles>, by Nicholas
Petreley.
http://www.linuxworld.com/linuxworld/lw-1999-06/lw-06-penguin_3.html

=item *

C<Ariadne>, Issue 21: I<What is mod_perl?>, by Ian
Peacock. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue21/unix/

=item *

What's mod_perl (in Russian)
http://www.host.ru/documentation/pro/0003.html

=item * 

Several of Stas' mod_perl articles translated to Russian by Inga
Zakharova: http://www.providerz.ru/articles/perl/why_mod_perl.html
http://www.providerz.ru/articles/perl/mod_perl_in_30_minutes_1.html

=item *

"Understanding mod_perl", the tutorial, presented by Benoit Beauséjour
at the Montreal Perl Mongers meeting.
http://www.flatlineconstruct.com/talk/understanding_mod_perl/index.html

=back

 META: more articles are welcome

=head1 Are You Interested in Publishing Your Own mod_perl Article?

We always welcome new mod_perl articles. Here are some steps to help you
out.

First, you should find out if your information might be better suited
as documentation for mod_perl. We try to maintain a big knowledge base
here, and additions are always welcome. Please contact L<the docs-dev
mailing
list|maillist::docs-dev> with patches or additions.

If it doesn't fit into the documentation, Take23 (
http://www.take23.org ), the mod_perl news site, always welcomes new
articles. We suggest that you submit your article there, as it is the
main place for mod_perl-specific activity.

For the content, we advocate reuse. If you're writing installation
instructions, you are free to get as much inspiration as you want from
the documentation on this site, especially the user guides. You should
always try and re-write it a little to add your own touch or more
user-friendliness, but you may keep the same steps and
information. After all, there's only one way to install it, and it's
pretty weel-documented already! This is true for all other aspects
covered here too. Of course, if you feel like you have created
something useful for everyone, feel free to send it back to us so that
we can re-enter it into our documentation base.

Last, but not least, when you do publish your article, please notify us,
so that we can make a notice of it here!

=cut
