=head1 NAME

mod_perl and Related Books

=head1 Description

This document presents the published mod_perl and related books.

=head1 mod_perl books

These are the mod_perl specific books.

=head2 Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C

http://www.modperl.com is the home site of The Apache Modules Book, a book
about creating Web server modules using the Apache API, written by
Lincoln Stein and Doug MacEachern.

The book should be available from your local bookstore or from your
favorite on-line bookseller.  O'Reilly & Associates lists this book
as:

  Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C
  By Lincoln Stein & Doug MacEachern
  1st Edition March 1999
  2nd Edition Feb 2000
  1-56592-567-X, Order Number: 567X
  746 pages, $34.95

=head2 The mod_perl Developer's Cookbook

Home site: http://www.modperlcookbook.org

SAMS lists this book as:

  The mod_perl Developer's Cookbook
  By Geoffrey Young; Paul Lindner; Randy Kobes
  ISBN: 0672322404
  Pub. Date: Jan 17,2002
  Price: $39.99
  Pages: 600

=head2 Practical mod_perl

http://www.modperlbook.com is the home site of the new mod_perl book,
that Eric Cholet and Stas Bekman are co-authoring.  We expect the book
to be published in 2002 by O'Reilly & Associates.

Ideas, suggestions and comments are welcome. Please send them to
E<lt>info {at} modperlbook.comE<gt>.

=head2 mod_perl Quick Reference Card

I<mod_perl Pocket Reference> by Andrew Ford was published by O'Reilly
and Associates http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/modperlpr/

  Apache Pocket Reference
  By Andrew Ford
  June 2000
  1-56592-706-0, Order Number: 7060
  110 pages, $9.95 US $14.95 CA £6.95 UK

You should probably get also the I<Apache Pocket Reference> by the
same author and the same publisher:
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/apachepr/

See also Andrew's collection of reference card for Apache and other
programs: http://www.refcards.com.

=head1 Books talking about mod_perl

Some books mention mod_perl, usually because they have to do with
Apache, Perl or Linux in a web environment, and as such are required
to talk about mod_perl:

=over

=item * Perl for the Web

By Chris Radcliff. B<Perl for the Web> talks about mod_perl and
related technologies in some of its chapters. It is available verbatim
online: http://www.globalspin.com/thebook/

=item * Professional Linux Deployment

B<Chapter 5: Deploying Web and FTP Servers> of I<Professional Linux
Deployment> by Mike Banahan I<et al.> (Wrox) contains a section about
mod_perl. It is available online:
http://www.networkcomputing.com/netdesign/1111web.html .

=item * Programming Perl, 3rd Edition

By Larry Wall, Tom Christiansen & Jon Orwant.
http://www.ora.com/catalog/pperl3/

=item * Learning Perl, 3rd Edition

By Randal L. Schwartz, Tom Phoenix.
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/lperl3/

=item * Apache: The Definitive Guide, 2nd Edition

By Ben Laurie, Peter Laurie.  http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/apache2/

=item * Webmaster in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition

By Stephen Spainhour, Robert Eckstein.
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/webmaster2/

=item * MySQL and Perl for the Web

Interested in using MySQL, Perl, and Apache to create dynamic
database-backed web applications? This book shows you how.

  Paul DuBois 
  New Riders
  ISBN: 0735710546 
  552 pages

http://www.kitebird.com/mysql-perl/

=item * Writing CGI Applications with Perl

Writing CGI Applications with Perl (http://perlcgi-book.com/) shows
you how to use Perl to accomplish the most vital tasks needed for
today's online applications. Using numerous examples, line-by-line
code explanations, and skill-stretching exercises, this book not only
provides useful cut-and-paste code for your own programs, but it also
teaches you practical skills and techniques that will enable you to
develop any kind of CGI-based Web application with Perl.

Chapter 9 covers the use of mod_perl.

By Kevin Meltzer and Brent Michalski.

=back


=head1 Apache books

This is a list of all known books about Apache sorted by the year when
they where published and in alphabetical
order. http://httpd.apache.org/info/apache_books.html

=head1 CGI and Perl books

There are gazillions of Perl and CGI/Perl books out there. We couldn't
find a single resource covering them all. Here are some of the places
to start from.

These resources provide listing of Perl books plus 3rd party reviews:

=over

=item * 

http://www.perl.com/language/critiques/

=item * 

http://www.reviewsonline.com/perl.htm

=item * 

http://slashdot.org/books/

=back

These resources provide listing of Perl books without 3rd party reviews:

=over

=item * 

http://www.sysarch.com/cgi-bin/perl_books

=item * 

http://perl.oreilly.com/

=item * 

http://wwwiz.com/books/cgi-perl.html

=item * 

http://www.stonehenge.com/books/

=item * 

http://www.perldoc.com/books/

=item * 

http://www.theperlreview.com/books.shtml

=back


=cut

