=head1 NAME

Other topics

=head1 Description

Where to learn more about other topics that are useful for mod_perl
developers and users.

=head1 Perl

=over

=item * The Perl Documentation

http://www.perldoc.com/

=item * The Perl Home Page

http://www.perl.com/

=item * The Perl Monks

http://www.perlmonks.org/

What Perl Monks is: Our attempt to make learning Perl as
nonintimidating and easy to use as possible. A place for you and
others to polish, improve, and showcase your Perl skills. A community
which allows everyone to grow and learn from each other.

=item * The Perl Journal

http://www.tpj.com/

=item * The Perl Review

http://theperlreview.com/

The Perl Review is a magazine for the Perl community by the Perl
community produced with open source tools.

=item * CPAN - Comprehensive Perl Archive Network

http://cpan.org and http://search.cpan.org/


=item * Perl Module Mechanics

http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/module_mechanics.html - This
page describes the mechanics of creating, compiling, releasing and
maintaining Perl modules.

=item * Creating (and Maintaining) Perl Modules

http://www.mathforum.com/~ken/perl_modules.html

=item * XS tutorials

Perl manpages: I<perlguts>, I<perlxs>, and I<perlxstut> manpages.

Dean Roehrich's XS CookBookA and CookBookB
http://search.cpan.org/search?dist=CookBookA
http://search.cpan.org/search?dist=CookBookB

a series of articles by Steven McDougall:
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/intro/index.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/concepts.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/tools/index.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/modules/modules.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/nw/NW.html

I<Advanced Perl Programming> By Sriram Srinivasan. Published by
O'Reilly & Associates. ISBN: 1-56592-220-4. Chapters 18-20.
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/advperl/

perl-xs mailing list on perl.org (mail perl-xs-subscribe@perl.org)

Take a look also at Inline.pm (CPAN) and SWIG (http://www.swig.org/)

=item * Perl mailing lists

A huge number of diverse Perl mailing lists is listed at
http://lists.perl.org/.

=item * perl5-porters mailing list

Send an email:

=over

=item * 

to perl5-porters-subscribe@perl.org to subscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-subscribe@perl.org if you prefer a digest
version.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe from the
digest.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-help@perl.org for more information about the
subscription options.

=back

List's archive is available at
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/.

=back

=head1 Perl/CGI

=over

=item * Perl/CGI FAQ

at http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/cgi/perl-cgi-faq.html

=item * Answers to some troublesome Perl and Perl/CGI questions

http://stason.org/TULARC/webmaster/myfaq.html

=item * Idiot's Guide to CGI programming

http://www.webdeveloper.com/cgi-perl/cgi_idiots_guide_to_perl.html

=item * WWW Security FAQ

http://www.w3.org/Security/Faq/www-security-faq.html

=item * CGI/Perl Taint Mode FAQ

http://www.gunther.web66.com/FAQS/taintmode.html (by Gunther
Birznieks)

=item * cgi-list mailing list

Send email to majordomo@jann.com with body:

  subscribe cgi-list

=back

=head1 Apache 

=over

=item * Apache Project's Home

http://www.apache.org

=item * Apache Mailing Lists

You will find a comprehensive list of all Apache projects' mailing
lists at: http://www.apache.org/foundation/mailinglists.html.

httpd specific lists: http://httpd.apache.org/lists.html.

=item * the Apache Modeling Portal

http://apache.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/ - An introduction to the Apache HTTP
Server, covering both an overview and implementation details. It
presents results of the Apache Modelling Project done by research
assistants and students of the Hasso-Plattner-Institute in 2001 and
2002.

=item * Apache Quick Reference Card

http://www.refcards.com (other reference cards are also available 
from this link)

=item * The Apache FAQ

http://www.apache.org/docs/misc/FAQ.html

=item * Apache Server Documentation

http://www.apache.org/docs/

=item * Apache Handlers

http://www.apache.org/docs/handler.html

=item * mod_rewrite Guide

http://www.engelschall.com/pw/apache/rewriteguide/

=item * Security:

Security and Apache: An Essential Primer
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1527/

Using Apache with Suexec on Linux
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1445/

How to 'chroot' an Apache tree with Linux and Solaris
http://penguin.epfl.ch/chroot.html

Installing and Securing the Apache Webserver with SSL
http://online.securityfocus.com/infocus/1356

How to break out of a chroot() jail:
http://www.bpfh.net/simes/computing/chroot-break.html

Jails: Confining the omnipotent root:
http://docs.freebsd.org/44doc/papers/jail/jail.html

FreeBSD Developers' Handbook: The Jail Subsystem
http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/developers-handbook/jail.html

=item * mod_throttle_access

mod_throttle_access is available at http://www.fremen.org/apache/

=back

=head1 DBI and SQL

=over

=item * Introduction to Structured Query Language:

http://www.dbbm.fiocruz.br/class/Lecture/d17/sql/jhoffman/sqltut.html

=item * SQL for Web Nerds by Philip Greenspun

http://www.arsdigita.com/books/sql/

=item * Jeffrey Baker's DBI Examples and Performance Tuning

http://www.saturn5.com/~jwb/dbi-examples.html (by Jeffrey William
Baker).

=item * DBI Homepage

http://dbi.perl.org/

=item * DBI mailing list information

http://www.fugue.com/dbi/ 

=item * DBI mailing list archives

http://www.bitmechanic.com/mail-archives/dbi-users/
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/dbi/

=back

=head1 Squid - Internet Object Cache

=over 4

=item * Home page

http://www.squid-cache.org/

=item * FAQ

http://www.squid-cache.org/Doc/FAQ/FAQ.html

=item * Users Guide

http://www.squid-cache.org/Doc/Users-Guide/

=item * Mailing lists

http://www.squid-cache.org/mailing-lists.html

=back

=head1 CVS -- Concurrent Version Control

mod_perl CVS repository specific information
L<document|contribute::cvs_howto>.

=over

=item * Open Source Development with CVS

http://cvsbook.red-bean.com/

=item * Online Documents

http://www.cvshome.org/docs/

=item * CVS Quick Reference Card

http://www.refcards.com/about/cvs.html

=back

=head1 Performance and Scalability

=over

=item * Techniques and Technologies for Scaling Internet Services mailing list.

The list's address: scalable@arctic.org.
Subscribe by sending a message to scalable-subscribe@arctic.org.
Archive: http://archive.develooper.com/scalable@arctic.org/

=item * Solaris 2.x - Tuning Your TCP/IP Stack and More

http://www.sean.de/Solaris/tune.html

This page talks about TCP/IP stack and various tricks of tuning your
system to get the most out of it as a web server. While the
information is for Solaris 2.x OS, most of it will be relevant of
other Unix flavors. At the end an extensive list of related literature
is presented.

=item * High-Availability Linux Project

http://www.linux-ha.org/

=back

=head1 Unix OS flavors -- Unix OS related resources

=over

=item * Memory system management and architecture:

The Solaris memory system, sizing, tools and architecture:
http://www.sun.com/sun-on-net/performance/vmsizing.pdf

=back

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * 

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut
