=head1 NAME

mod_perl 1.0 Win32 Configuration Instructions

=head1 Description

This document discusses how to configure mod_perl 1.0 under Win32.

=head1 Configuration

Add this line to F<C:\Apache\conf\httpd.conf>:

 LoadModule perl_module modules/mod_perl.so

Be sure that the path to your Perl binary (eg, F<C:\Perl\bin>) is in
your C<PATH> environment variable. This can be done either through
editing F<C:\AutoExec.bat>, if present, or through the 
I<Environment Variables> option of the I<Advanced>
tab in the I<System> area of the Control Panel. Especially
when running Apache as a service, you may also want to add

 LoadFile "C:/Path/to/Perl/bin/perl56.dll"

in F<httpd.conf>, before loading C<mod_perl.so>,
to load your perl C<dll>.

If you have a C<ClearModuleList>
directive enabled in F<httpd.conf>, you may also need to add

 AddModule mod_perl.c

See the descriptions of the C<ClearModuleList> and C<AddModule>
directives in the Apache documents for more details, especially
concerning the relative order of these and the C<LoadModule>
directive.

=head1 Registry scripts

Using C<Apache::Registry> to speed up cgi scripts may be done as
follows. Create a directory, for example, F<C:\Apache\mod_perl>, which
will hold your scripts, such as

  ##  printenv -- demo CGI program which just prints its environment
  ##
  use strict;
  print "Content-type: text/html\n\n";
  print "<HTML><BODY><H3>Environment variables</H3><UL>";
  foreach (sort keys %ENV) {
    my $val = $ENV{$_};
    $val =~ s|\n|\\n|g;
    $val =~ s|"|\\"|g;
    print "<LI>$_ = \"${val}\"</LI>\n";
  }
  #sleep(10);
  print "</UL></BODY></HTML>";

Note that Apache takes care of using the proper line endings
when sending the I<Content-type> header. Next, insert in 
F<C:\Apache\conf\httpd.conf> the following directives:

  Alias /mod_perl/ "/Apache/mod_perl/"
  <Location /mod_perl>
     SetHandler perl-script
     PerlHandler Apache::Registry
     Options +ExecCGI
     PerlSendHeader On
  </Location>

whereby the script would be called as

   http://localhost/mod_perl/name_of_script

=head1 Hello World

As you will discover, there is much to mod_perl beyond simple speed-up
of cgi scripts. Here is a simple I<Hello, World> example that
illustrates the use of mod_perl as a content handler.  Create a file
F<Hello.pm> as follows:

  package Apache::Hello;
  use strict;
  use Apache::Constants qw(OK);
  
  sub handler {
     my $r = shift;
     $r->send_http_header;
     $r->print("<html><body>Hello World!</body></html>\n");
     return OK;
   }
  
  1;

and save it in, for example, the F<C:\Perl\site\lib\Apache\>
directory. Next put the following directives in
F<C:\Apache\conf\httpd.conf>:

  PerlModule Apache::Hello
  <Location /hello>
     SetHandler perl-script
     PerlHandler Apache::Hello
  </Location>

With this, calls to

   http://localhost/hello

will use C<Apache::Hello> to deliver the content.

=head1 Apache modules

The C<theorxy5> repository containing the mod_perl ppm package also
contains a number of other Apache modules, such as C<Apache::ASP>,
C<HTML::Embperl>, and C<HTML::Mason>. However, there may be ones you
find that are not available through a repository; in such cases, you
might try sending a message to the maintainer of the repository asking
if a particular package could be included.

Alternatively, you can use the C<CPAN.pm> module to fetch, build, and
install the module - see C<perldoc CPAN> for details. You will need
the B<nmake> utility for this, download it from
http://download.microsoft.com/download/vc15/Patch/1.52/W95/EN-US/Nmake15.exe
(it's a self extracting archive, so run it and then copy the files
into your F<Windows> directory).

=head1 See Also

The directions for L<installing mod_perl 1.0 on
Win32|docs::1.0::os::win32::install>, the L<mod_perl
documentation|docs::index>, and http://take23.org/.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * 

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back

=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut
