=head1 NAME

Frequently asked questions for mod_perl on Win32

=head1 Description

This document discusses some questions that arise often
with mod_perl on Win32.

=head1 Resolving Problems

If you don't find a solution to your problem here, make sure to check
the other troubleshooting documents according to the used mod_perl
version as explained in the following sections.

=head2 Problems with mod_perl 1.0

If you have troubles with mod_perl 1.0, please refer to the following
documents:

=over

=item *

L<Frequent mod_perl 1.0 problems|docs::1.0::guide::frequent>

=item *

L<General mod_perl 1.0 troubleshooting|docs::1.0::guide::troubleshooting>

=item *

L<Debugging mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::guide::debug>

=back

If the solution is still not found, see the L<guide to getting help
with mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::guide::help>.

=head2 Problems with mod_perl 2.0

=over

=item *

L<Win32 specific 2.0 problems|docs::2.0::os::win32::faq>

=item *

L<General troubleshooting guide for mod_perl
2.0|docs::2.0::user::troubleshooting::troubleshooting>

=item *

L<Debugging mod_perl 2.0 Perl
code|docs::2.0::devel::debug::perl>

=item *

L<Debugging mod_perl 2.0 internals|docs::2.0::devel::debug::c>.

=back

If the solution is still not found, see the L<guide to getting help
with mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::user::help::help>.

=head1 Obtaining mod_perl

=head2 Do I need Perl to use mod_perl?

Yes, Perl is required. You can obtain a Win32 Perl
binary from L<http://www.activestate.com/>. See also
the all-in-one binary packages for both
L<mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::os::win32::install/All_in_one_packages>
and
L<mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::os::win32::install/All_in_one_packages>
which include Perl, Apache, and mod_perl.

=head2 Are mod_perl ppm packages available?

PPM packages for both
L<mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>,
for ActivePerl 6xx builds, and 
L<mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>,
for ActivePerl 8xx builds, are available.

=head2 Should I use mod_perl 1.0 or mod_perl 2.0?

L<mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::guide::intro>, for use with Apache 1.0, 
is stable and well tested, while 
L<mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::user::intro::overview>, for use with 
Apache 2.0, is in a development stage. Normally, therefore, one
would recommend mod_perl 2.0 only in a testing and development
environment. However, on Win32 mod_perl 1.0 is subject to some serious
L<threading limitations|docs::1.0::os::win32::multithread>
which are overcome with mod_perl 2.0; this, coupled
with the improved performance of Apache 2.0 on Win32, may
make mod_perl 2.0 a better choice.

=head1 Installing mod_perl

=head2 I get an "unable to load mod_perl.so" error when starting
Apache.

This can be due to a number of reasons.

=over 

=item *

Verify that mod_perl.so was compiled against the same Perl and Apache
versions that you are using.

=item *

Check that the directory containing C<perl.exe> is in your I<PATH> environment variable.

=item *

Try inserting a directive

   LoadFile "C:/Path/to/your/Perl/bin/perlxx.dll"

before the

   LoadModule perl_module modules/mod_perl.so

directive, where F<perlxx.dll> is the Perl dll in your Perl I<bin> directory.

=item *

Try a reboot.

=back

=head2 How do I set the PATH environment variable?

This differs according to the flavour of Win32 you are using.
Search for I<set PATH environment> within the Windows
Help utility under the Start menu for instructions.

=head1 Configuring mod_perl

=head2 How do I know scripts are running under mod_perl?

You can test this by using a script which prints out the
L<environment
variables|docs::1.0::guide::install/Testing_via_a_CGI_script>; 
note that for mod_perl 2.0 a slightly L<different
configuration|docs::2.0::os::win32::config/Registry_scripts>
is required.

=head2 I get an error about not being able to spawn a process for my CGI script.

This means that the first line of your script (the I<shebang> line),

     #!/Path/to/Your/Perl/bin/Perl.exe

is not pointing to the location of your Perl binary. Shebang lines are
common in a Unix environment, where they are used to indicate with
which program a script is to be run by, but are not normally used
as such on Win32, except in this context within Apache.

=head2 My script gets returned as plain text.

See the discussion of configuring 
L<Apache::Registry|docs::1.0::guide::config/My_CGI_Perl_Code_Gets_Returned_as_Plain_Text_Instead_of_Being_Executed_by_the_Webserver>; for mod_perl 2.0, a
L<different
configuration|docs::2.0::user::porting::compat/C_Apache__Registry___C_Apache__PerlRun__and_Friends>
is required.

=head2 I get a "Save-As" dialogue box when calling a script.

If the extension of the file being called is C<pl>, or some
other common extension, and if the problem happens with a
browser on Windows, it may be that there is a file association
set up within Windows for that extension. Try changing the
extension of the file to something for which a file association
is normally not present, such as C<cgi>.

If this doesn't help, see the discussion about 
L<PerlSendHeader|docs::1.0::guide::config/My_Script_Works_under_mod_cgi__but_when_Called_via_mod_perl_I_Get_a__Save_As__Prompt>; note that for mod_perl 2.0, 
there is a L<different
syntax|docs::2.0::user::porting::compat/C_PerlSendHeader_>.

=head2 My script displays a "Content-type" header in the browser.

Check the setting of 
L<PerlSendHeader|docs::1.0::guide::porting/Generating_correct_HTTP_Headers>;
note that for mod_perl 2.0, there is a L<different
syntax|docs::2.0::user::porting::compat/C_PerlSendHeader_>.

=head1 Using mod_perl

=head2 One request must finish before another is processed.

You are probably running into 
L<multithreading limitations|docs::1.0::os::win32::multithread>
of mod_perl 1.0; if this is a major problem, you should 
consider using
L<mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::os::win32::install>.

=head2 My script just hangs.

You should check the setting of 
L<PerlSendHeader|docs::1.0::guide::porting/Generating_correct_HTTP_Headers>;
for mod_perl 2.0, there is a L<different
syntax|docs::2.0::user::porting::compat/C_PerlSendHeader_>.
If this setting is correct, and
this occurs under mod_perl 2.0 and
Perl-5.6.1, try upgrading to
L<Perl-5.8.0|docs::2.0::os::win32::install>.

=head2 I get a "Can't find "Some::Module" in @INC ..." error

If this is a custom module installed outside of the system
Perl @INC directories, see I<perldoc lib>. If this is
a mod_perl module, and you are using mod_perl 2, try
using the I<Apache2> module, as described in
L<accessing mod_perl 2
modules|docs::2.0::user::config::config/Accessing_the_mod_perl_2_0_Modules>.

=head2 When starting Apache, an error concerning a missing entry point in mod_perl.so appears.

This might be due to an incompatibility between the installed mod_perl
files in the Perl tree and the mod_perl.so library within the Apache
(or Apache2) modules directory. If you're installing mod_perl via ppm, first 
try removing mod_perl (or mod_perl-dev, if you're using the 
development version):

  ppm> remove mod_perl

Next, remove (or move to another location) the mod_perl.so
library under the Apache (or Apache2) modules directory:

  C:\> del Apache2\modules\mod_perl.so

(assuming F<C:\Apache2> is your top-level Apache2 directory).
You may have to stop Apache to be able to do this. Then install 
mod_perl via ppm:

  ppm> install mod_perl

and ensure that the post-install script successfully fetches
and installs F<mod_perl.so>.

=head2 I get a "Can't locate object method ..." error.

First off, if this is due to running some script from the
command line, this might be normal behaviour, as many
Apache modules require one to be in the Apache environment
to work. If this does occur from within Apache, and is
a problem with mod_perl 2.0, it may be that the right
module hasn't been loaded - see the discussion of
L<Command Line 
Lookups|docs::2.0::api::ModPerl::MethodLookup/Command_Line_Lookups>
for a method to discover which module is needed.

=head2 How do I run ASP scripts?

For a mod_perl solution, check L<http://www.apache-asp.org/>
for a discussion of the Apache::ASP module.

=head2 How do I install additional Apache modules?

If these aren't available via ppm from the repositories
for 
L<mod_perl 1.0|docs::1.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>
or
L<mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>,
you can build them using the
L<CPAN.pm|docs::1.0::os::win32::config/Apache_modules>
module.

=head2 Why can't my scripts execute external programs with GUI frontends from 
within Apache/mod_perl?

The issue is not an Apache/mod_perl issue per se. Any service that 
allows execution of external binaries that try to initialize and display 
GUI components will have problems under OSs like Windows 2K+, Unix, 
Linux and MacOS X.
This would have worked in Win 98 because apps all run in the same user 
space (under the same user ID). Those resources happened to be, for the 
most part, linked to almost everything else running on the system. Hence 
when you ran a gui app from within Apache the system would display the 
gui part of it on the screen. The OS saw no difference between the web 
server running in the background and the user's desktop.
The best way to deal with this is to see if the application you are 
trying to run has a /quiet switch or something that will keep it from 
trying to draw any GUI components/dialog boxes to the screen. If you 
wrote the application you are trying to execute then you should put a 
hook into it that will allow that option (obviously adding the code to 
bypass the gui code) and then execute it with the new option. The best 
way to execute programs under Perl's system call is to write a console 
application. If you would like to take output from that application then 
you should write to STDOUT all text you want the perl application to see 
as a return value from your C<qx> or `` (backticks) call.

=head2 An error about being unable to load a file results when using a DBD database driver.

Try putting the path to your database DLLs in
your I<PATH> environment variable. Also, make sure you are using the
latest versions of I<DBI> and your I<DBD::*> driver.

=head2 I get an error about being unable to load I<Apache::Request>.

For mod_perl 1.0, make sure you have installed the I<libapreq> ppm package
described for L<mod_perl 1.0 ppm
packages|docs::1.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>; the
I<libapreq> package available in the ActiveState repository
will not work under mod_perl. A development version of I<libapreq2>,
suitable for use with mod_perl 2.0 / Apache 2.0, is available at
L<http://www.apache.org/~joes/>, with a Win32 ppm package
available as described for L<mod_perl 2.0 ppm
packages|docs::2.0::os::win32::install/PPM_Packages>.

=head2 My Apache2 installation did not come with the C<apxs> utility.

The utilities C<apxs>, C<apr-config>, and C<apu-config> have
not been fully ported yet to Win32 for Apache2. A development port
is available in the F<apxs_win32.tar.gz> archive found under
L<http://perl.apache.org/dist/win32-bin/>; installation
instructions are found in the accompanying F<README> file.
One can also install these utilties by running the F<install_apxs>
script under L<http://perl.apache.org/dist/win32-bin/>. Note that
this port does not offer yet the full functionality of
the unix version - in particular, features enabling the utilities
to be used within the Apache2 sources are missing. Nevertheless,
they may be useful for building and installing 3rd-party C modules.

=head2 Why is use of C<Apache::Log> on Win32 so slow?

On Win32 Apache attempts to lock all writes to a file whenever
it's opened for append (which is the case with logging functions), as
Unix has this behavior built-in, while Win32 does not. Therefore
C<Apache::Log> functions could be slower than Perl's print()/warn().

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * 

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Randy Kobes E<lt>randy@theoryx5.uwinnipeg.caE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.

=cut

