=head1 NAME

Workarounds for some known bugs in browsers.

=head1 Description

Unfortunately for web programmers, browser bugs are not uncommon, and
sometimes we have to deal with them; refer to this chapter for some
known bugs and how you can work around them.


=head1 Preventing QUERY_STRING from getting corrupted because of &entity key names

In a URL which contains a query string, if the string has multiple
parts separated by ampersands and it contains a key named "reg", for
example C<http://example.com/foo.pl?foo=bar&reg=foobar>, then some
browsers will interpret C<&reg> as an SGML entity and encode it as
C<&reg;>.  This will result in a corrupted C<QUERY_STRING>. If you
encounter this problem, then either you should avoid using such keys
or you should separate parameter pairs with C<;> instead of C<&>.
C<CGI.pm>, C<Apache::Request> and C<$r-E<gt>args()> support a semicolon
instead of an ampersand as a separator.  So your URI should look like
this: C<http://example.com/foo.pl?foo=bar;reg=foobar>.

Note that this is only an issue when you are building your own URLs
with query strings.  It is not a problem when the URL is the result 
of submitting a form because the browsers I<have> to get that right.

=head1 IE 4.x does not re-post data to a non-port-80 URL

One problem with publishing 8080 port numbers (or so I have been 
told) is that IE 4.x has a bug when re-posting data to a non-port-80 
URL.  It drops the port designator and uses port 80 anyway.

See L<Publishing Port Numbers other than
80|guide::config/Publishing_Port_Numbers_other_than_80>.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut

