=head1 NAME

Getting Help and Further Learning

=head1 Description

If your question isn't answered by reading this guide, check this section
for information on how to get help on mod_perl, Apache, or other topics
discussed here.


=head1 READ ME FIRST

If, after reading this guide and the other documents listed in this
section, you still don't have the answers/information needed, please
ask for help on the Apache/mod_perl mailing list.  But please, first 
try to browse the mailing list archive.  Most of the time you will 
find the answer to your questions by searching the archive, since it is 
very likely that someone else has already encountered the same problem
and found a solution for it.  If you ignore this advice, you should not
be surprised if your question is left unanswered - it bores people to
answer the same question more than once.  This does not mean that you
should avoid asking questions, but you should not abuse the available
help and you should I<RTFM> before you call for I<HELP>.  (Remember the
fable of the shepherd boy and the wolves).

For more information See L<Get help with
mod_perl|guide::help/Get_help_with_mod_perl>.

=head1 How to Report Problems

Always send these details:

=over

=item * Anything in the I<error_log> file that looks suspicious and
possibly related to the problem.

=item * Output of C<perl -V>

=item * Version of mod_perl

=item * Version of apache

=item * Options given to mod_perl's Makefile.PL

=item * Server configuration details

=item * Relevant sections of your ErrorLog (make test's is: t/logs/error_log)

=item * If 'make test' fails, the output of 'make test TEST_VERBOSE=1'

=back

Also check whether:

=over

=item * 'make test' passes 100%?

=item * the script works under mod_cgi if applicable

=back

You should try to isolate the problem and send the smallest possible
code snippet, that reproduces the problem. If the issue is unique and
we cannot reproduce the problem, it's hard to solve it.

=over

=item Getting the Backtrace From Core Dumps

If you get a I<core> file dump (I<Segmentation fault>), please send a
backtrace if possible.  Before you try to produce it, re-build
mod_perl with:

  panic% perl Makefile.PL PERL_DEBUG=1

which will:

=over

=item * add C<-g> to C<EXTRA_CFLAGS>

=item * turn on C<PERL_TRACE>

=item * set C<PERL_DESTRUCT_LEVEL=2> (additional checks during Perl cleanup)

=item * link against I<libperld> if it exists

=back

Here is a summary of how to get a backtrace:

  panic% cd mod_perl-x.xx
  panic% touch t/conf/srm.conf
  panic% gdb ../apache_x.xx/src/httpd
  (gdb) run -X -f `pwd`/t/conf/httpd.conf -d `pwd`/t
  [now make request that causes core dump]
  (gdb) bt

So you go to the mod_perl source directory, create an empty
I<srm.conf> file, and start gdb with a path to the httpd binary, which
is at least located in the Apache source tree after you built it. (Of
course replace I<x> with real version numbers). Next step is to start
the httpd from within gdb and issue a request, which causes a core
dump. when the code has died with SEGV sygnal, run I<bt> to get the
backtrace.

Alternatively you can also attach to an already running process like
so:

  panic% gdb httpd <process id number>

If the dump is happening in I<libperl> you have to rebuild Perl with
C<-DDEBUGGING> enabled. A quick way to this is to go to your Perl
source tree and run these commands:

  panic% rm *.[oa]
  panic% make LIBPERL=libperld.a
  panic% cp libperld.a $Config{archlibexp}/CORE

where C<$Config{archlibexp}> is:

  % perl -V:archlibexp

=item Spinning Processes

The gdb attaching to the live process approach is helpful when
debugging a I<spinning> process.  You can also get a Perl stacktrace
of a I<spinning> process by install a C<$SIG{USR1}> handler in your
code:

  use Carp ();
  $SIG{USR1} = \&Carp::confess;

While the process is spinning, send it a I<USR1> signal:

  panic% kill -USR1 <process id number>

and the Perl stack trace will be printed.

alternatively you can use gdb to find which Perl code is causing the
spin:

  panic% gdb httpd <pid of spinning process>
  (gdb) where
  (gdb) source mod_perl-x.xx/.gdbinit
  (gdb) curinfo

After loading the special macros file (I<.gdbinit>) you can use the
I<curinfo> gdb macro to figure out the file and line number the code
stuck in.

=back

Finally send all these details to the modperl mailing list.

=head1 Get help with mod_perl

=over

=item * mod_perl home

http://perl.apache.org

=item * News and Resources

Take23: News and Resources for the mod_perl world 
http://take23.org

=item * mod_perl Books

=over

=item * Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C

http://www.modperl.com is the home site of The Apache Modules Book, a book
about creating Web server modules using the Apache API, written by
Lincoln Stein and Doug MacEachern.

The book should be available from your local bookstore or from your
favorite on-line bookseller.  O'Reilly lists this book as:

  Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C
  By Lincoln Stein & Doug MacEachern
  1st Edition March 1999
  2nd Edition Feb 2000
  1-56592-567-X, Order Number: 567X
  746 pages, $34.95

=item * The mod_perl Developer's Cookbook

Home site: http://www.modperlcookbook.org

SAMS lists this book as:

  The mod_perl Developer's Cookbook
  By Geoffrey Young; Paul Lindner; Randy Kobes
  ISBN: 0672322404
  Pub. Date: Jan 17,2002
  Price: $39.99
  Pages: 600

=item * Practical mod_perl

http://www.modperlbook.com is the home site of the new mod_perl book,
that Eric Cholet and Stas Bekman are co-authoring.  We expect
the book to be published in 2002.

Ideas, suggestions and comments are welcome. Please send them to
info@modperlbook.com .

=item * mod_perl Quick Reference Card

I<mod_perl Pocket Reference> by Andrew Ford was published by O'Reilly
and Associates http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/modperlpr/

You should probably get also the I<Apache Pocket Reference> by the
same author and the same publisher:
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/apachepr/

See also Andrew's collection of reference card for Apache and other
programs: http://www.refcards.com.

=back

=item * mod_perl Guide

by Stas Bekman at http://perl.apache.org/guide

=item * mod_perl FAQ

by Frank Cringle at http://perl.apache.org/faq/ .

=item * mod_perl performance tuning guide 

by Vivek Khera at http://perl.apache.org/tuning/ .

=item * mod_perl plugin reference guide 

by Doug MacEachern at http://perl.apache.org/src/mod_perl.html .

=item * Quick guide for moving from CGI to mod_perl

at http://perl.apache.org/dist/cgi_to_mod_perl.html .

=item * mod_perl_traps, common traps and solutions for mod_perl users

at http://perl.apache.org/dist/mod_perl_traps.html .

=item * Articles

=over

=item * ApacheToday

http://apachetoday.com

=item * Basic knowledge about Apache stages and mod_perl handlers
article in German

http://www.heise.de/ix/artikel/2000/01/156/

=back

=item * mod_perl mailing lists

META: shouldn't we just link directly to the mailing list page? (once
linking to a section works).

=over

=item *

L<The mod_perl mailing list|maillist::list-modperl>

The Apache/Perl mailing list I<is available for mod_perl users and
developers to share ideas, solve problems and discuss things related
to mod_perl and the Apache::* modules.>

See the L<mailing list's info page|maillist::list-modperl> for more info.


=item *

L<The mod_perl development mailing list|maillist::list-dev>

This list is for discussions about the development of the core
mod_perl.


=item *

L<The mod_perl documentation mailing list|maillist::list-docs-dev>

This mailing list is for discussing mod_perl documentation, and is the one
you should contact with issues related to this Guide or other
documentation on this website.

=item *

L<The Apache test framework development mailing
list|maillist::list-test-dev>

The test-dev list is the list where Apache HTTP Test project is
discussed.

=item *

L<The advocacy mailing list|maillist::list-advocacy>

The list for mod_perl advocacy issues, discussions about
sites, etc.

=item *

L<The modperl-cvs mailing list|maillist::list-cvs>

The modperl developers list is the list where you can watch mod_perl
getting patched.  No real discussions happen on this list, but if you
want to know about the latest changes in the mod_perl core before
everyone else, this is a list to be on.

=back

=back

=head1 Get help with Perl

=over

=item * The Perl FAQ

http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/FAQ/PerlFAQ.html

=item * The Perl Home Page

http://www.perl.com/

=item * The Perl Journal

http://www.tpj.com/

=item * Perl Module Mechanics

http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/module_mechanics.html - This
page describes the mechanics of creating, compiling, releasing and
maintaining Perl modules.

=item * Creating (and Maintaining) Perl Modules

http://www.mathforum.com/~ken/perl_modules.html

=item * XS tutorials

Perl manpages: I<perlguts>, I<perlxs>, and I<perlxstut> manpages.

Dean Roehrich's XS CookBookA and CookBookB
http://search.cpan.org/search?dist=CookBookA
http://search.cpan.org/search?dist=CookBookB

a series of articles by Steven McDougall:
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/intro/index.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/concepts.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/tools/index.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/modules/modules.html
http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/pm/xs/nw/NW.html

I<Advanced Perl Programming> By Sriram Srinivasan. Published by
O'Reilly & Associates. ISBN: 1-56592-220-4. Chapters 18-20.
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/advperl/

perl-xs mailing list on perl.org (mail perl-xs-subscribe@perl.org)

Take a look also at Inline.pm (CPAN) and SWIG (http://www.swig.org/)

=item * Perl mailing lists

A huge number of diverse Perl mailing lists is listed at
http://lists.perl.org/.

=item * perl5-porters mailing list

Send an email:

=over

=item * 

to perl5-porters-subscribe@perl.org to subscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-subscribe@perl.org if you prefer a digest
version.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe from the
digest.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-help@perl.org for more information about the
subscription options.

=back

List's archive is available at
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/.

=back

=head1 Get help with Perl/CGI

=over

=item * Perl/CGI FAQ

at http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/cgi/perl-cgi-faq.html

=item * Answers to some troublesome Perl and Perl/CGI questions

http://stason.org/TULARC/webmaster/myfaq.html

=item * Idiot's Guide to CGI programming

http://www.webdeveloper.com/cgi-perl/cgi_idiots_guide_to_perl.html

=item * WWW Security FAQ

http://www.w3.org/Security/Faq/www-security-faq.html

=item * CGI/Perl Taint Mode FAQ

http://www.gunther.web66.com/FAQS/taintmode.html (by Gunther
Birznieks)

=item * cgi-list mailing list

Send email to majordomo@jann.com with body:

  subscribe cgi-list

=back

=head1 Get help with Apache 

=over

=item * Apache Project's Home

http://www.apache.org

=item * Apache Mailing Lists

You will find a comprehensive list of all Apache projects' mailing
lists at: http://www.apache.org/foundation/mailinglists.html

=item * Apache Quick Reference Card

http://www.refcards.com (other reference cards are also available 
from this link)

=item * The Apache FAQ

http://www.apache.org/docs/misc/FAQ.html

=item * Apache Server Documentation

http://www.apache.org/docs/

=item * Apache Handlers

http://www.apache.org/docs/handler.html

=item * mod_rewrite Guide

http://www.engelschall.com/pw/apache/rewriteguide/

=item * Security:

Security and Apache: An Essential Primer
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1527/

Using Apache with Suexec on Linux
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1445/

How to 'chroot' an Apache tree with Linux and Solaris
http://penguin.epfl.ch/chroot.html

Installing and Securing the Apache Webserver with SSL
http://online.securityfocus.com/infocus/1356

How to break out of a chroot() jail:
http://www.bpfh.net/simes/computing/chroot-break.html

Jails: Confining the omnipotent root:
http://docs.freebsd.org/44doc/papers/jail/jail.html

FreeBSD Developers' Handbook: The Jail Subsystem
http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/developers-handbook/jail.html

=item * mod_throttle_access

mod_throttle_access is available at http://www.fremen.org/apache/

=back

=head1 Get help with DBI and SQL

=over

=item *

Introduction to Structured Query Language:
http://www.dbbm.fiocruz.br/class/Lecture/d17/sql/jhoffman/sqltut.html

=item *

SQL for Web Nerds by Philip Greenspun
http://www.arsdigita.com/books/sql/

=item * Jeffrey Baker's DBI Examples and Performance Tuning

http://www.saturn5.com/~jwb/dbi-examples.html (by Jeffrey William
Baker).

=item * DBI Homepage

http://www.symbolstone.org/technology/perl/DBI/

=item * DBI mailing list information

http://www.fugue.com/dbi/ 

=item * DBI mailing list archives

http://www.bitmechanic.com/mail-archives/dbi-users/
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/dbi/

=back

=head1 Get help with Squid - Internet Object Cache

=over 4

=item *

Home page - http://squid.nlanr.net/

=item *

FAQ - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/FAQ/FAQ.html

=item *

Users Guide - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/Users-Guide/

=item *

Mailing lists - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/mailing-lists.html

=back

=head1 Get help with CVS -- Concurrent Version Control

=over

=item *

The mod_perl cvs repository specific L<document|faqs::mod_perl_cvs>.

=item *

Open Source Development with CVS
http://cvsbook.red-bean.com/

=item *

Online Documents
http://www.cvshome.org/docs/

=item *

CVS Quick Reference Card
http://www.refcards.com/about/cvs.html

=back

=head1 Get help with Performance and Scalability

=over

=item * Techniques and Technologies for Scaling Internet Services mailing list.

The list's address: scalable@arctic.org.
Subscribe by sending a message to scalable-subscribe@arctic.org.
Archive: http://archive.develooper.com/scalable@arctic.org/

=item *

I<Solaris 2.x - Tuning Your TCP/IP Stack and More>
http://www.sean.de/Solaris/tune.html

This page talks about TCP/IP stack and various tricks of tuning your
system to get the most out of it as a web server. While the
information is for Solaris 2.x OS, most of it will be relevant of
other Unix flavors. At the end an extensive list of related literature
is presented.

=item *

High-Availability Linux Project
http://www.linux-ha.org/

=back

=head1 Get help with Unix OS flavors -- Unix OS related resources

=over

=item * Memory system management and architecture:

The Solaris memory system, sizing, tools and architecture:
http://www.sun.com/sun-on-net/performance/vmsizing.pdf

=item * 

=back

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * 

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut
