=head1 NAME

Introduction and Incentives

=head1 Description

An introduction to what mod_perl is all about, its different features,
and some explanations of the C API, C<Apache::Registry>,
C<Apache::PerlRun> and the Apache/Perl API.


=head1 What is mod_perl?

The Apache/Perl integration project brings together the full power of
the Perl programming language and the Apache HTTP server. With
mod_perl it is possible to write Apache modules entirely in Perl,
letting you easily do things that are more difficult or impossible in
regular CGI programs, such as running sub requests. In addition, the
persistent Perl interpreter embedded in the server saves the overhead
of starting an external interpreter, i.e. the penalty of Perl start-up
time.  And not the least important feature is code caching, where
modules and scripts are loaded and compiled only once, and for the
rest of the server's life they are served from the cache. Thus the
server spends its time only running already loaded and compiled code,
which is very fast.

The primary advantages of mod_perl are power and speed. You have full
access to the inner workings of the web server and can intervene at
any stage of request-processing. This allows for customized processing
of (to name just a few of the phases) URI-E<gt>filename translation,
authentication, response generation, and logging. There is very little
run-time overhead. In particular, it is not necessary to start a
separate process, as is often done with web-server extensions. The
most wide-spread such extension, the Common Gateway Interface (CGI),
can be replaced entirely with Perl code that handles the response
generation phase of request processing.  mod_perl includes two general
purpose modules for this purpose: C<Apache::Registry>, which can
transparently run existing perl CGI scripts and C<Apache::PerlRun>,
which does a similar job but allows you to run "dirtier" (to some
extent) scripts.

You can configure your httpd server and handlers in Perl (using
C<PerlSetVar>, and E<lt>PerlE<gt> sections). You can even define your
own configuration directives.

For examples on how you use mod_perl, see our L<What is
mod_perl?|start::index> section.

Many people ask "How much of a performance improvement does mod_perl
give?" Well, it all depends on what you are doing with mod_perl and
possibly who you ask. Developers report speed boosts from 200% to
2000%. The best way to measure is to try it and see for yourself! (See
L<Technologie Extraordinaire|outstanding::index> for the facts.)

=head2 mod_cgi

When you run your CGI scripts by using a configuration like this:

  ScriptAlias /cgi-bin/ /home/httpd/cgi-bin/

you run it under a mod_cgi handler, you never define it
explicitly. Apache does all the configuration work behind the scenes,
when you use a ScriptAlias.

By the way, don't confuse C<ScriptAlias> with the C<ExecCGI>
configuration option, which we enable so that the script will be
executed rather than returned as a plain text file. For example for
mod_perl and C<Apache::Registry> you would use a configuration like:

  <Location /perl>
    SetHandler perl-script
    PerlHandler Apache::Registry
    Options +ExecCGI
    PerlSendHeader On
  </Location>

=head2 C API

The Apache C API has been present for a long time, and has been the
usual way to program extensions to Apache, such as mod_perl. When you
write C extension modules, you write C code that is not independent,
but will be linked into the Apache I<httpd> executable either at build
time (if the module is statically linked), or at runtime (if it is
compiled as a Dynamic Shared Object, or DSO). Either way, you do as
with any C library: you write functions that receive a certain number
of arguments and make use of external API functions, provided by
Apache or by other libraries.

The difference is that with Apache extension modules, these functions
are I<registered> inside a module record: you tell Apache already at
compile-time for which phases you wish to run any functions. Of
course, you probably won't be handling all the phases. Here is an
example of a module handling only the content generation phase:

  /* Dispatch list of content handlers */
  static const handler_rec hello_handlers[] = {
      { "hello", hello_handler },
      { NULL, NULL }
  };
  
  /* Dispatch list for API hooks */
  module MODULE_VAR_EXPORT hello_module = {
      STANDARD_MODULE_STUFF,
      NULL,                  /* module initializer                  */
      NULL,                  /* create per-dir    config structures */
      NULL,                  /* merge  per-dir    config structures */
      NULL,                  /* create per-server config structures */
      NULL,                  /* merge  per-server config structures */
      NULL,                  /* table of config file commands       */
      hello_handlers,        /* [#8] MIME-typed-dispatched handlers */
      NULL,                  /* [#1] URI to filename translation    */
      NULL,                  /* [#4] validate user id from request  */
      NULL,                  /* [#5] check if the user is ok _here_ */
      NULL,                  /* [#3] check access by host address   */
      NULL,                  /* [#6] determine MIME type            */
      NULL,                  /* [#7] pre-run fixups                 */
      NULL,                  /* [#9] log a transaction              */
      NULL,                  /* [#2] header parser                  */
      NULL,                  /* child_init                          */
      NULL,                  /* child_exit                          */
      NULL                   /* [#0] post read-request              */
  };

Using this configuration (and a correctly built C<hello_handler()>
function), you'd then be able to use the following configuration to
allow your module to handle the requests for the I</hello> URI.

  <Location /hello>
    SetHandler hello
  </Location>

When Apache sees a request for the I</hello> URI, it will then figure
out what the "hello" handler corresponds to by looking it up in the
handler record, and match that to the C<hello_handler> function
pointer, which will execute the C<hello_handler> function of your
module with a C<request_rec *r> as an argument. From that point, your
handler is free to do whatever it wants, returning content, declining
the request, or doing other bizarre things based on user input.

It is not the object of this guide to explain how to program C
handlers. However, this example lets you in on some of the secrets of
the Apache core, which you will probably understand anyway by using
mod_perl. If you want more information on writing C modules, you
should read the Apache API documentation at
http://httpd.apache.org/docs/misc/API.html and more importantly
I<Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C>, which will teach you about
I<both> mod_perl and C modules!

=head2 Perl API

After a while, C modules were found hard to write and difficult to
maintain, mostly because code had to be recompiled or just because of
the low-level nature of the C language, and because these modules were
so intricately linked with Apache that a small bug could put at risk
your whole server environment. In comes mod_perl. Programmed in C and
using all the techniques described above and more, it allows Perl
modules, written in good Perl style, to access the (almost) complete
API provided to the conventional C extensions.

However, the structure used for Perl Apache modules is a little
different. If you've programmed normal Perl modules (like those found
on CPAN) before, you'll be happy to know that programming for mod_perl
using the Apache API doesn't involve anything else than writing a Perl
module that defines a C<handler> subroutine (that is the
convention--we'll see that that doesn't necessarily have to be the
name). This subroutine accepts an argument, C<$r>, which is the Perl
API equivalent of the C API C<request_rec *r>.

C<$r> is your entry point to the whole Perl Apache API. Through it you
access methods in good object-oriented fashion, which makes it
slightly easier than with C, and looks a lot more familiar to Perl
programmers.

Furthermore, Perl Apache modules do not define handler records like C
modules. You only need to create your handler subroutine(s), and then
control which requests they should handle solely with mod_perl
configuration directives inside your Apache configuration.

Let's look at a sample handler that returns a greeting and the current
local time.

  file:My/Greeting.pm
  -------------------
  package My::Greeting;
  use strict;
  
  use Apache::Constants qw(OK);
  
  sub handler {
      my $r = shift;
      my $now = scalar localtime;
      my $server_name = $r->server->server_hostname;
  
      $r->send_http_header('text/plain');
  
      print <<EOT;
  Thanks for visiting $server_name.
  The local time is $now.
  EOT
  
      return OK;
  }
  1; # modules must return true

As you can see, we're mixing Perl standard functions (like
C<localtime()>) with Apache functions
(C<$r-E<gt>send_http_header()>). To return the above greeting when
accessing the I</hello> URI, you would configure Apache like this:

  <Location /hello>
      SetHandler perl-script
      PerlHandler My::Greeting
  </Location>

When it sees this configuration, mod_perl loads the C<My::Greeting>
module, finds the C<handler()> subroutine, and calls it to allow it to
return the appropriate content. There are equivalent C<Perl*Handler>
directives for the different phases we saw were available to C
handlers.

The Perl API gives you an incredible number of possibilities, which
you can then use to be more productive or creative. mod_perl is an
enabling technology; it won't make you smarter or more creative, but
it will do its best to make you lose less time because of
I<"accidental difficulties"> of programming, and let you concentrate
more on the important parts.


=head2 Apache::Registry

From the viewpoint of the Perl API, L<Apache::Registry> is simply
another handler that's not conceptually different from any other
handler. C<Apache::Registry> reads in the script file, compiles,
executes it and stores into the cache.  Since the perl interpreter
keeps running from child process' creation to its death, any code
compiled by the interpreter is kept in memory until the child dies.

To prevent script name collisions, C<Apache::Registry> creates a
unique key for each cached script by prepending C<Apache::ROOT::> to
the mangled path of the script's URI.  This key is actually the
package name that the script resides in. So if you have requested a
script C</perl/project/test.pl>, the scripts would be wrapped in code
which starts with a package declaration of:

  package Apache::ROOT::perl::project::test_e2pl;

C<Apache::Registry> also stores the script's last modification time.
Everytime the script changes, the cached code is discarded and
recompiled using the modified source. However, it doesn't check the
modification times of any of the perl libraries the script might use.

C<Apache::Registry> overrides C<CORE::exit()> with C<Apache::exit()>,
so CGI scripts that use C<exit()> will run correctly. We will talk
about all these details in depth later.

From the viewpoint of the programmer, there is almost no difference
between running a script as a plain CGI script under mod_cgi and
running it under mod_perl.  There is however a great speed
improvement, but at the expense of much heavier memory usage (there is
no free lunch :).

When they run under  mod_cgi, your CGI scripts are loaded each time 
they are called and then they exit.  Under mod_perl they are loaded 
once and cached.  This gives a big performance boost.  But because the
code is cached and doesn't exit, it won't cleanup memory as it would
under mod_cgi.  This can have unexpected effects.

Your scripts will be recompiled and reloaded by mod_perl when
it detects that you have changed them, but remember that any 
libraries that your scripts might require() or use() will not 
be recompiled when they are changed.  You will have to take
action yourself to ensure that they are recompiled.

Of course the guide will answer all these issues in depth.

Let's see what happens to your script when it's being executed under
C<Apache::Registry>. If we take the simplest code of (URI
C</perl/project/test.pl>)

  print "Content-type: text/html\n\n";
  print "It works\n";

C<Apache::Registry> will convert it into the following:

  package Apache::ROOT::perl::project::test_e2pl;
  use Apache qw(exit);
  sub handler {
    print "Content-type: text/html\n\n";
    print "It works\n";
  }

The first line provides a unique namespace for the code to use, and a
unique key by which the code can be referenced from the cache.

The second line imports C<Apache::exit> which over-rides perl's
built-in C<exit>.

The C<sub handler> subroutine is wrapped around your code. By default
(i.e. if you do not specify an alternative), when you use mod_perl and
your code's URI is called, mod_perl will seek to execute the URI's
associated C<handler> subroutine.

C<Apache::Registry> is usually configured in this way:

  Alias /perl/ /usr/local/apache/bin/
  <Location /perl>
    SetHandler perl-script
    PerlHandler Apache::Registry
  </Location>

In short, we see that C<Apache::Registry> is just another mod_perl
handler, which is executed when requests are made for the I</perl>
directory, and then does some special handling of the Perl scripts in
that directory to turn I<them> into Apache handlers.


=head2 Apache::PerlRun

L<Apache::PerlRun> is very similar to C<Apache::Registry>. It uses the
same basic concepts, i.e. it runs CGI scripts under mod_perl for
additional speed. However, unlike C<Apache::Registry>,
C<Apache::PerlRun> will not cache scripts. The reason for this is that
it's designed for use with CGI scripts that may have been "dirty",
which might cause problems when run persistently under mod_perl. Apart
from that, the configuration is the same. We discuss
C<Apache::PerlRun> in L<Apache::PerlRun, a closer
look|guide::porting/Apache__PerlRun__a_closer_look>.


=head1 What you will learn

This document was written in an effort to help you start using
Apache's mod_perl extension as quickly and easily as possible. It
includes information about the installation and configuration of both
Perl and the Apache web server and delves deeply into the issues of
writing and porting existing Perl scripts to run under mod_perl. Note
that it does not attempt to enter the big world of using the Perl API
or C API.  You will find pointers to coverage of these topics in the
L<Offsite resources|docs::offsite::index> section of this site. This
guide tries to cover the most of the C<Apache::Registry> and
C<Apache::PerlRun> modules. Along with mod_perl related topics, there
are many more issues related to administering Apache servers,
debugging scripts, using databases, mod_perl related Perl, code
snippets and more.

It is assumed that you know at least the basics of building and
installing Perl and Apache. (If you do not, just read the INSTALL
documents which are part of the distribution of each package.)
However, in this guide you will find specific Perl and Apache
installation and configuration notes, which will help you successfully
complete the mod_perl installation and get the server running in a
short time.

If after reading this guide and the L<other documentation|docs::index>
you feel that your questions remain unanswered, you could try asking
the apache/mod_perl mailing list to help you.  But first try to browse
the L<mailing list
archive|maillist::modperl/Searchable_Archives>. Often you will find
the answer to your question by searching the mailing list archive,
since most questions have been asked and answered already!  If
you ignore this advice, do not be surprised if your question goes
unanswered - it bores people when they're asked to answer the same
question repeatedly - especially if the answer can be found in the
archive or in the documentation.  This does not mean that you should
avoid asking questions, just do not abuse the available help and
B<RTFM> before you call for B<HELP>. When asking your question, be
sure to have read the L<email-etiquette|maillist::email-etiquette> and
L<How to report problems|guide::help>

If you find errors in these documents, please contact the maintainer,
after having read about L<how to submit documentation
patches|download::docs/Submitting_documentation_patches>.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back


=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.


=cut
