=head1 NAME

Contribute to the Documentation

=head1 Submit Corrections

There is a lot of mod_perl documentation. And we are sure it includes
documentation bugs. So if you spot any make sure to report it.

The documentation includes code examples, which sometimes were written
without testing, so it's possible that they are broken. If some
example doesn't work for you, please, let us know.

If you notice bad English grammar and speling :), don't hesitate to
tell us where and what do you think is the best way to fix it.

=head1 Submit New Articles

If you have some mod_perl knowledge that is not documented please
share it and send us the documentation patch, or a complete new
article. This can include installation and configuration scenarious,
performance improving tips, debugging techniques and what not.

Developers using mod_perl constantly work with other technologies
related to mod_perl. If you have spent some time lurking on the
mod_perl lists, you have probably discovered that mod_perl developers
are pros in many other related fields, such as Apache, Perl,
relational databases, etc. If you think that the mod_perl community
will find an information about a related technology useful, please
submit this information for the inclusion in the documentation.

=head1 How to Send Information and Where

The documentation contributions and corrections are to be sent to the
mod_perl documentation mailing list.

If the correction is minor, please specify the URL you are talking
about, and preferrably the version number of the document if such is
available.

If the correction is medium to large, please retrieve the
documentation source package or use the cvs repository and submit the
patch against the latest version.

META: links?

=cut
