=head1 NAME

Contribute at the Mailing List

=head1 Description

The first way to contribute to the mod_perl community is by following
the mailing list and helping out anyone else having problems.

=head1 Answering Questions

Since mod_perl is an open source technology, its main support facility
are the L<mailing lists|maillist::index>. Therefore it's very essential
to support users and developers by sharing your mod_perl and related
knowledge through answering questions and submitting interesting posts
that enrich the community's knowledge in the related topics.

You don't have to be a guru to be a very valuable person to the
mod_perl community. Through answering questions you learn a lot by
yourself and eventually become a guru too. Actually, by doing a little
research for people (which they should have been doing themselves),
you'll learn of things you had never even thought of!

=head1 Helping Navigating the Documentation

mod_perl is one of the few open source projects that is bundled with a
lot of comprehensive documentation. And although the documentation is
well indexed, it can be hard to find the right piece of information,
especially for a novice mod_perl user. If you point someone to the
existing documentation, please try to point her to the specific URL
containing the information, and not just to "the mod_perl
documentation" in general.

=head1 Pointing to Past Discussions

Very often there will come up questions that have been answered
before. Instead of replicating answers, do everyone a favor and
retrieve the URL of the discussion from the
L<archives|maillist::modperl/"Searchable_Archives">, replying with
that if it answers the question or at least helps along the way.

=head1 Obeying the Email Etiquette

Do not forget the important L<mailing list
guidelines|maillist::email-etiquette>. Whenever posting to the list,
you should be aware of these and follow them as best as
possible. Furthermore, if some users seem to not be aware of it, don't
hesitate about pointing them to that place.

=cut

