=head1 NAME

Contribute by Sharing Code

=head1 Description

Your Perl and mod_perl know-how is more than welcome as contributions
to Apache modules or to mod_perl itself.

=head1 mod_perl Patches

If you have modified the mod_perl source code, improved and extended
it, please submit your modifications back to the mod_perl community so
others will be able to enjoy your efforts.

If you are trying to extend mod_perl, but don't have enough
tuits/knowledge to accomplish this by yourself you can ask the
mod_perl developers to help you. But make sure that you clearly
explain what you want to do and provide code samples if possible.

=head1 Complete Modules

If you have developed a third-party mod_perl module, consider
submitting it to CPAN (http://cpan.org/). Other than sharing your
works, chances are that the code will receive a lot of attention from
other users. This usually leads to more robust code and interface, as
it gets reviewed and improved by its users. In some cases new features
are submitted as patches, so you benefit from others sharing their
works with you.

Before submitting a new C<Apache::> module to CPAN, please discuss it
first on the L<mod_perl list|maillist::modperl>. It's important
to choose a good intuitive name for your module. Also it's possible
that a module with a similar functionality already exists and most
likely that someone will point it out. In which case you may want to
help developing this existing module instead and integrating your
features into it.

=head1 Code Snippets

If you have some neat code snippets, please send them to the mailing
list. If you are kind enough to annotate these, they could probably
fit into mod_perl documentation. At least they will be archived in the
mailing list archive and in the future users will be able to find
your code and reuse it.


=cut
