=head1 NAME

Apache::PerlRun - Run unaltered CGI scripts under mod_perl

=head1 Synopsis

  #in httpd.conf
  
  Alias /cgi-perl/ /perl/apache/scripts/
  PerlModule Apache::PerlRun
  
  <Location /cgi-perl>
    SetHandler perl-script
    PerlHandler Apache::PerlRun
    Options +ExecCGI
    #optional
    PerlSendHeader On
    ...
  </Location>

=head1 Description

This module's C<handler> emulates the CGI environment, allowing
programmers to write scripts that run under CGI or mod_perl without
change.  Unlike C<Apache::Registry>, the C<Apache::PerlRun> handler
does not cache the script inside of a subroutine.  Scripts will be
"compiled" every request.  After the script has run, it's namespace is
flushed of all variables and subroutines.

The C<Apache::Registry> handler is much faster than
C<Apache::PerlRun>.  However, C<Apache::PerlRun> is much faster than
CGI as the fork is still avoided and scripts can use modules which
have been pre-loaded at server startup time.  This module is meant for
"Dirty" CGI Perl scripts which relied on the single request lifetime
of CGI and cannot run under C<Apache::Registry> without cleanup.

=head1 Caveats

If your scripts still have problems running under the
C<Apache::PerlRun> handler, the C<PerlRunOnce> option can be used so
that the process running the script will be shutdown.  Add this to
your httpd.conf:

  <Location ...>
    PerlSetVar PerlRunOnce On
    ...
  </Location>

=head1 See Also

perl, mod_perl, L<Apache::Registry>

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * The L<documentation mailing list|maillist::docs-dev>

=back

=head1 Authors

=over

=item * Doug MacEachern

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.

=cut
