=head1 NAME

Apache::src - Methods for locating and parsing bits of Apache source code

=head1 Synopsis

 use Apache::src ();
 my $src = Apache::src->new;

=head1 Description

This module provides methods for locating and parsing bits of Apache
source code.

=head1 Methods

=over 4

=item new

Create an object blessed into the B<Apache::src> class.

 my $src = Apache::src->new;

=item dir

Top level directory where source files are located.

 my $dir = $src->dir;
 -d $dir or die "can't stat $dir $!\n";

=item main

Apache's source tree was reorganized during development of version 1.3.
So, common header files such as C<httpd.h> are in different directories
between versions less than 1.3 and those equal to or greater.  This
method will return the right directory.

Example:

 -e join "/", $src->main, "httpd.h" or die "can't stat httpd.h\n";

=item find

Searches for apache source directories, return a list of those found.

Example:

 for my $dir ($src->find) {
    my $yn = prompt "Configure with $dir ?", "y";
    ...
 }

=item inc

Print include paths for MakeMaker's B<INC> argument to
C<WriteMakefile>.

Example:

 use ExtUtils::MakeMaker;

 use Apache::src ();

 WriteMakefile(
     'NAME'    => 'Apache::Module',
     'VERSION' => '0.01',
     'INC'     => Apache::src->new->inc,     
 );


=item module_magic_number

Return the B<MODULE_MAGIC_NUMBER> defined in the apache source.

Example:

 my $mmn = $src->module_magic_number;

=item httpd_version

Return the server version.

Example:

 my $v = $src->httpd_version;

=item otherldflags

Return other ld flags for MakeMaker's B<dynamic_lib> argument to
C<WriteMakefile>. This might be needed on systems like AIX that need
special flags to the linker to be able to reference mod_perl or httpd
symbols.

Example:

 use ExtUtils::MakeMaker;

 use Apache::src ();

 WriteMakefile(
     'NAME'        => 'Apache::Module',
     'VERSION'     => '0.01',
     'INC'         => Apache::src->new->inc,     
     'dynamic_lib' => {
 'OTHERLDFLAGS' => Apache::src->new->otherldflags,
     },
 );

=back


=head1 Author

Doug MacEachern

=cut
