=head1 NAME

Apache::test - Facilitates testing of Apache::* modules

=head1 Synopsis

  # In Makefile.PL
  use Apache::test;
  my %params = Apache::test->get_test_params();
  Apache::test->write_httpd_conf(%params, include => $more_directives);
  *MY::test = sub { Apache::test->MM_test(%params) };
  
  # In t/*.t script (or test.pl)
  use Apache::test qw(skip_test have_httpd);
  skip_test unless have_httpd;
  (Some more methods of Doug's that I haven't reviewed or documented yet)

=head1 Description

This module helps authors of C<Apache::*> modules write test suites
that can query an actual running Apache server with mod_perl and their
modules loaded into it.  

Its functionality is generally separated into methods that go in a
I<Makefile.PL> to configure, start, and stop the server, and methods
that go in one of the test scripts to make HTTP queries and manage the
results.

=head1 Methods

=head2 get_test_params()

This will ask the user a few questions about where the httpd binary
is, and what user/group/port should be used when running the server.
It will return a hash of the information it discovers.  This hash is
suitable for passing to the C<write_httpd_conf()> method.

=head2 write_httpd_conf(%params)

This will write a basic I<httpd.conf> file suitable for starting a
HTTP server during the C<make test> stage.  A hash of key/value pairs
that affect the written file can be passed as arguments.  The
following keys are recognized:

=over 4

=item * conf_file

The path to the file that will be created.  Default is I<t/httpd.conf>.

=item * port

The port that the Apache server will listen on.

=item * user

The user that the Apache server will run as.

=item * group

The group that the Apache server will run as.

=item * include

Any additional text you want added at the end of the config file.
Typically you'll have some C<PerlModule> and C<Perl*Handler>
directives to pass control to the module you're testing.  The C<blib/>
directories will be added to the C<@INC> path when searching for
modules, so that's nice.

=back

=head2 MM_test(%params)

This method helps write a Makefile that supports running a web server
during the C<make test> stage.  When you execute C<make test>, C<make>
will run C<make start_httpd>, C<make run_tests>, and C<make
kill_httpd> in sequence.  You can also run these commands
independently if you want.

Pass the hash of parameters returned by C<get_test_params()> as an
argument to C<MM_test()>.

To patch into the C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> wizardry (voodoo?), typically
you'll do the following in your I<Makefile.PL>:

  *MY::test = sub { Apache::test->MM_test(%params) };

=head2 fetch

  Apache::test->fetch($request);
  Apache::test->fetch($user_agent, $request);

Call this method in a test script in order to fetch a page from the
running web server.  If you pass two arguments, the first should be an
C<LWP::UserAgent> object, and the second should specify the request to
make of the server.  If you only pass one argument, it specifies the
request to make.

The request can be specified either by a simple string indicating the
URI to fetch, or by a hash reference, which gives you more control
over the request.  The following keys are recognized in the hash:

=over 4

=item * uri

The URI to fetch from the server.  If the URI does not begin with
C<http>, we prepend C<http://localhost:$PORT> so that we make requests
of the test server.

=item * method

The request method to use.  Default is C<GET>.

=item * content

The request content body.  Typically used to simulate HTML fill-out
form submission for C<POST> requests.  Default is null.

=item * headers

A hash of headers you want sent with the request.  You might use this
to send cookies or provide some application-specific header.

=back

If you don't provide a C<headers> parameter and you set the C<method>
to C<POST>, then we assume that you're trying to simulate HTML form
submission and we add a C<Content-Type> header with a value of
C<application/x-www-form-urlencoded>.

In a scalar context, C<fetch()> returns the content of the web server's
response.  In a list context, C<fetch()> returns the content and the
C<HTTP::Response> object itself.  This can be handy if you need to check
the response headers, or the HTTP return code, or whatever.

=head2 static_modules

  Example: $mods = Apache::test->static_modules('/path/to/httpd');

This method returns a hashref whose keys are all the modules
statically compiled into the given httpd binary.  The corresponding
values are all 1.

=head1 Examples

No good examples yet.  Example submissions are welcome.  In the meantime, see
http://forum.swarthmore.edu/~ken/modules/Apache-AuthCookie/ , which
I'm retrofitting to use C<Apache::test>.

=head1 To Do

The C<MM_test> method doesn't try to be very smart, it just writes the
text that seems to work in my configuration.  I am morally against
using the C<make> command for installing Perl modules (though of course
I do it anyway), so I haven't looked into this very much.  Send bug
reports or better (patches).

I've got lots of code in my C<Apache::AuthCookie> module (etc.) that
assists in actually making the queries of the running server.  I plan
to add that to this module, but first I need to compare what's already
here that does the same stuff.

=head1 Kudos

To Doug MacEachern for writing the first version of this module.

To caelum@debian.org (Rafael Kitover) for contributing the code to
parse existing httpd.conf files for C<--enable-shared=max> and DSOs.

=head1 Caveats

Except for making sure that the mod_perl distribution itself can run
C<make test> okay, I haven't tried very hard to keep compatibility with
older versions of this module.  In particular C<MM_test()> has changed
and probably isn't usable in the old ways, since some of its
assumptions are gone.  But none of this was ever documented, and
C<MM_test()> doesn't seem to actually be used anywhere in the mod_perl
disribution, so I don't feel so bad about it.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * The L<documentation mailing list|maillist::list-docs-dev>

=back

=head1 Authors

=over

=item * Doug MacEachern

=item * Ken Williams

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.

=cut
