=head1 NAME

Apache::Util - Interface to Apache C util functions

=head1 Synopsis

  use Apache::Util qw(:all);

=head1 Description

This module provides a Perl interface to some of the C utility
functions available in Apache.  The same functionality is avaliable in
libwww-perl, but the C versions are faster:

    use Benchmark;
    timethese(1000, {
        C => sub { my $esc = Apache::Util::escape_html($html) },
        Perl => sub { my $esc = HTML::Entities::encode($html) },
    }); 

    Benchmark: timing 1000 iterations of C, Perl...
            C:  0 secs ( 0.17 usr  0.00 sys =  0.17 cpu)
         Perl: 15 secs (15.06 usr  0.04 sys = 15.10 cpu)

    use Benchmark;
    timethese(10000, {
        C => sub { my $esc = Apache::Util::escape_uri($uri) },
        Perl => sub { my $esc = URI::Escape::uri_escape($uri) },
    });

    Benchmark: timing 10000 iterations of C, Perl...
            C:  0 secs ( 0.55 usr  0.01 sys =  0.56 cpu)
         Perl:  2 secs ( 1.78 usr  0.01 sys =  1.79 cpu)

=head1 Functions

=over 4

=item escape_html

This routine replaces unsafe characters in $string with their entity
representation.

 my $esc = Apache::Util::escape_html($html);

This function will correctly escape US-ASCII output. If you are using
a different character set such as UTF8, or need more control on
the escaping process, use HTML::Entities.

=item escape_uri

This function replaces all unsafe characters in the $string with their
escape sequence and returns the result.

 my $esc = Apache::Util::escape_uri($uri);

=item unescape_uri

This function decodes all %XX hex escape sequences in the given URI.

 my $unescaped = Apache::Util::unescape_uri($safe_uri);

=item unescape_uri_info

This function is similar to unescape_uri() but is specialized to remove
escape sequences from the query string portion of the URI. The main
difference is that it translates the ``+'' character into spaces  as well
as recognizing and translating the hex escapes.

Example:

 $string = $r->uri->query;
 my %data = map { Apache::Util::unescape_uri_info($_) }
              split /[=&]/, $string, -1;

 This would correctly translate the query string
 ``name=Fred+Flintstone&town=Bedrock'' into the hash:

 data => 'Fred Flintstone',
 town => 'Bedrock'

=item parsedate

Parses an HTTP date in one of three standard forms:

 Sun, 06 Nov 1994 08:49:37 GMT  ; RFC 822, updated by RFC 1123

 Sunday, 06-Nov-94 08:49:37 GMT ; RFC 850, obsoleted by RFC 1036

 Sun Nov  6 08:49:37 1994       ; ANSI C's asctime() format      

Example:

 my $secs = Apache::Util::parsedate($date_str);

=item ht_time

Format a time string.

Examples:

 my $str = Apache::Util::ht_time(time);

 my $str = Apache::Util::ht_time(time, "%d %b %Y %T %Z");

 my $str = Apache::Util::ht_time(time, "%d %b %Y %T %Z", 0);

=item size_string

Converts the given file size into a formatted string. The size
given in the string will be in units of bytes, kilobytes, or
megabytes, depending on the size.

 my $size = Apache::Util::size_string -s $r->finfo;

=item validate_password

Validate a plaintext password against a smashed one.  Use either
crypt() (if available), ap_MD5Encode() or ap_SHA1Encode depending
upon the format of the smashed input password.

Returns true if they match, false otherwise.

 if (Apache::Util::validate_password("slipknot", "aXYx4GnaCrDQc")) {
     print "password match\n";
 }
 else {
     print "password mismatch\n";
 }

=back

=head1 Author

Doug MacEachern

=head1 See Also

perl.

=cut
