=head1 NAME

Preparing mod_perl modules for CPAN

=head1 Description

This document provides information for CPAN modules developers whose
modules require mod_perl.

=head1 Defining Makefile.PL Prerequisites that Require mod_perl

If there are any prerequisites that need to be defined in
I<Makefile.PL>, but require a mod_perl environment to successfully get
loaded, the following workaround can be used. The following example
will specify two prerequisites: C<CGI.pm> and C<Apache::DBI>, the
latter can be loaded only under mod_perl whereas the former can be
loaded from the command line.

  file:Makefile.PL
  ----------------
  use ExtUtils::MakeMaker;
  
  # set prerequisites
  my %prereq = (
      'CGI' => 2.71,
  );
  
  # Manually test whether Apache::DBI is installed and add it to the
  # PREREQ_PM if it's not installed, so CPAN.pm will automatically fetch
  # it. If Apache::DBI is already installed it will fail to get loaded by
  # MakeMaker because it requires the mod_perl environment to load.
  eval { require Apache::DBI };
  if ($@ && $@ !~ /Can't locate object method/) {
      $prereq{'Apache::DBI'} = 0.87;
  }
  
  WriteMakefile(
      NAME          => 'Apache::SuperDuper',
      VERSION_FROM  => 'SuperDuper.pm',
      PREREQ_PM     => \%prereq,
      # ... the rest
  );

Notice that I<Can't locate object method> is a part of the error
generated when C<Apache::DBI> is installed but is attempted to be
loaded outside of mod_perl, e.g. at the command line, which is the
case with I<Makefile.PL>.



=head1 Writing the Test Suite

The C<Apache::Test> framework provides an easy way to test modules
which require mod_perl (or Apache in general), be it 1.0 or 2.0
generation. Here is L<the complete guide to the C<Apache::Test>
framework|docs::general::testing::testing>.

=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Stas Bekman E<lt>stas (at) stason.orgE<gt>

=item * 

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.

=cut
