=head1 NAME

How to pronounce mod_perl

=head1 Description

Do you think that "mod_perl" is a strange name and wondering about how
to pronounce it?

=head1 "mod_perl"

Over the years there have been many people complaining about
"mod_perl" being an unsuitable name for this product and it's hard to
"sell it" to their bosses. However, the name has a long tradition and
is here to stay.

The "mod_" part comes from the prefix all Apache modules have:
mod_rewrite, mod_dir, etc. If you look at the DSO filenames you'll see
that they are all like "mod_I<xxx>.so". This is also the case for
mod_perl.

As for the "perl" part, the origin is pretty obvious.

The name is straight to the point and clearly describes what the
application does. Those who have requested a change of name have never
obtained it, often for the simple reason that "If you can't sell
mod_perl to your boss based on its technical merits, the name is the
least of your worries".

=head1 Pronunciation

One issue still remains: how are we supposed to pronounce this name?

In phonetic (AHD, see
http://www.dictionary.com/help/ahd4/pronkey.html), mod_perl looks like:

=for html <b>m&ocirc;d&#183;p&ucirc;rl</b>

The underscore marks a slight pause between the "mod" and "perl"
parts.

Below we have collected recordings of mod_perl developers around the
globe pronouncing mod_perl.

=for html
<table border="0" cellpadding="1" cellspacing="1">
<tr>
        <th class="table-title-bg">
        <div class="table-title">
                Name
        </div>
        </th>
        <th class="table-title-bg">
        <div class="table-title">
                WAV
        </div>
        </th>
        <th class="table-title-bg">
        <div class="table-title">
                MP3
        </div>
        </th>
        <th class="table-title-bg">
        <div class="table-title">
                Ogg Vorbis
        </div>
        </th>
</tr>
<tr>
        <td class="table-bg">
                Per Einar Ellefsen
        </td>
        <td class="table-bg">
                <a href="pronounce/pereinar.wav">Listen</a>
        </td>
        <td class="table-bg">
                <a href="pronounce/pereinar.mp3">Listen</a>
        </td>
        <td class="table-bg">
                <a href="pronounce/pereinar.ogg">Listen</a>
        </td>
</tr>
</table>
=cut
