=head1 NAME

mod_perl Documentation project's Changes File Specs

=head1 Description

This doc clears the confusion regarding the need and the maintenance
guidelines of I<Changes.pod> files in the project.

=head1 Who Has Contributed What And When

All the modifications of every single file can be viewed via C<cvs
log> command. e.g., to check the history of this very file, one would
run:

  % cvs log admin/changes_file.pod

Which will display all the commit logs, who has committed the change,
who has submitted the changes, etc.

=head1 The Art of Changes File

The I<Changes.pod> document is not the same as the history of all
changes. This document is for end user consumption, who is interested
to know what are the major changes since the last time she read the
documents. Or minor but important changes, like bug fixes.

Therefore the I<Changes.pod> document is only needed when some
sub-project goes through changes which will be of interest to the
reader. Don't just add I<Changes.pod> everywhere, until you really
think it's needed.

The format of this document should be as dense as possible, so the
reader can read through it fast and pin-point if there is something
interesting to it.

There is no need to log the date every time the change is done ('cvs
log' has all the info). Though it's nice to group the changes by
certain milestones, so let's say every few month a time stamp is added
in front of the group of the changes since the last timestamp and new
changes will go to the new group. The change entries in the
I<docs/1.0/guide/Changes.pod> is a good example of that. In addition
it used to add a version number for each milestone, which is very
optional now.

This file should have the latest changes on the top.

=head1 The Scope of Changes.pod

Usually we have a separate I<Changes.pod> file for each sub-set of the
documents. If you feel that the changes for a few sub-sets nested in
the same super-set of docs can be maintained in one file, have only
one I<Changes.pod>. Later if this file becomes too overloaded and its
added value is getting diminished, split it into a few I<Changes.pod>
files placed in each sub-set. Or if you think that this will happen in
the near future do this from the beginning to avoid the slicing work
later.

=head1 Adding Credits

If you are the maintainer of the document, you don't have to credit
each change done by you, with your name, simply leave the change entry
un-credited, which automatically implies that you did that.

If someone commits something to the document maintained by someone
else simply mark it with your name e.g. [Thomas Klausner]. Those who
commit all the time, should pick some short (nick?)name that will
distinguish them from others and make their changes with it. e.g
[thomas]. The idea is to have the changes file with as little noise as
possible.

There is a special case where we want to credit people who contributed
very minor fixes, which don't deserve a separate changes entry. In
this case just have a special entry like C<Minor fixes>, where you
simply list the names of those who contributed because we want to give
credits to everybody. Again the I<docs/1.0/guide/Changes.pod> file
perfectly demonstrates that.

=head1 Sample Changes.pod

See <docs/1.0/guide/Changes.pod> as a good example.

A typical entry looks like this:

  =head1 ???
  
  * books: Fixed some things and then other things, and then some other
    things bla bla bla. [John Doe E<lt>john.doe (at) aol.comE<gt>]
  
  * file: Added some content. [stas]
  
  * otherfile: updated the "Maintenance" section, adding references to
    bla bla bla [other person]

  =head1 Sat Nov 12 22:05:23 CET 2002

  * docs::index : moved tutorials to "Other documentation" [stas]
  
  * performance: minor corrections [thomas]

Please try to keep things correctly aligned here (ie. the first
characters on each line should be vertically aligned with eachother),
as this file will most often be viewed as text.

As you can see, we try to collect a number of changes, then timestamp
the document like a "version".

You can use the I<Changes_template.pod> as a starting point.

=cut
