=head1 NAME

Binary mod_perl distributions

=head1 Description

This document includes links to various binary mod_perl distributions.

If you know about a distribution that isn't listed here, please tell
us (by announcing it at the L<mod_perl list|maillist::modperl>).

See also L<the source distributions|download::source> and the
L<bundles|download::bundles>.

=head1 How to get pre-compiled mod_perl

=head2 Win32 mod_perl 1.x

Win32 mod_perl Binaries (made by Randy Kobes) -
ftp://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/pub/other/. Grab a perl-win32-bin-x.x.exe
self-extracting file. There's accompanying readme files with more details
on the particular versions of packages included. These all include Perl
and some common modules, so are largish.

For more information please read the L<Win32 Documentation|docs::1.0::win32::index> 

=head2 Win32 mod_perl 2.x (BETA)

An experimental mod_perl-2.0 win32 binary package is available at
ftp://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/pub/other/Apache2.tar.gz for those Win32
users who want a preview of things to come.

This archive will unpack into an "Apache2" directory, underneath which
is a "blib" subdirectory containing the necessary perl files.  These
are included when starting Apache by a modperl directive found near
the end of I<conf/httpd.conf>, where a sample "Hello World" modperl
handler is also found. Some editing of I<httpd.conf> will be necessary
if this package is installed in a location other than
I<"D:\Apache2">. Within the I<blib/> subdirectory is some
documentation on modperl-2.0.

The package was compiled with the cvs sources of Jan 1, 2002, using
VC++ 6 and an ActivePerl based on perl-5.6.1. The libmodperl.so
library in the Apache I<modules/> directory will most probably not
work with other Apache-2 binary packages.

Being under development, there are bugs present; in particular, when
stopping an Apache-2 service a memory error results if modperl is
enabled. Please let me know of any problems you might have in getting
this package installed; for questions/problems on Apache-2, see the
docs at http://httpd.apache.org/docs-2.0/, and for modperl-2, see the
information on L<subscribing to the "dev" mailing list|maillist::dev>.

=head2 Win32 Active Perl

Win32 ActivePerl mod_perl ppms - suitable for builds 6xx.  You can install
this by, within the ppm shell, setting the repository to
I<http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/cgi-bin/ppmserver?urn:/PPMServer> and
typing C<install mod_perl>. This will also run a post-install script to
install the required mod_perl.so to your Apache modules/ directory. This
mod_perl package is built against the current stable Apache release -
earlier versions are available
(http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppmpackages/mod_perl-legacy/), as are some
ppms of other Apache modules (http://theoryx5.uwinnipeg.ca/ppmpackages/).

=head2 RedHat Linux

Static mod_perl and libapreq (Apache::Request) RPMs and SRPMs (made by
David Harris ) http://www.davideous.com/modperlrpm/distrib/. Mirrored at
http://perl.apache.org/rpm/.

=head2 RedHat Linux (including php3)

i386 RPMs + SRPM (RedHat) of Apache with mod_perl and php3 built
staticaly. (made by Vladimir Ivaschenko)
http://www.hazard.maks.net/apache/

=head2 other OS

OS vendors may supply their own pre-compiled version of mod_perl.
Refer to your OS vendor to figure out if they provide a binary version
of mod_perl.

=cut
