=head1 NAME

Apache::Table - Perl interface to the Apache table structure

=head1 Synopsis

  use Apache::Table ();
  
  my $headers_out = $r->headers_out;
  while(my($key,$val) = each %$headers_out) {
    ...
  }
  
  my $table = $r->headers_out;
  $table->set(From => 'dougm@perl.apache.org');

mod_perl needs to be compiled with at least one of the following options:

 DYNAMIC=1
 PERL_TABLE_API=1
 EVERYTHING=1

=head1 Description

This module provides tied interfaces to Apache data structures.

=head2 Classes

=over 4

=item Apache::Table

The C<Apache::Table> class provides methods for interfacing with the
Apache C<table> structure.  The following C<Apache> class methods,
when called in a scalar context with no "key" argument, will return a
I<HASH> reference blessed into the I<Apache::Table> class and where
I<HASH> is tied to C<Apache::Table>:

 headers_in
 headers_out
 err_headers_out
 notes
 dir_config
 subprocess_env

=back

=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item get

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_get> function.

  my $value = $table->get($key);
  
  my $value = $headers_out->{$key};

=item set

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_set> function.

  $table->set($key, $value);
  
  $headers_out->{$key} = $value;

=item unset

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_unset> function.

  $table->unset($key);
  
  delete $headers_out->{$key};

=item clear

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_clear> function.

  $table->clear;
  
  %$headers_out = ();

=item add

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_add> function.

  $table->add($key, $value);

=item merge

Corresponds to the C<ap_table_merge> function.

  $table->merge($key, $value);

=back



=head1 Maintainers

Maintainer is the person(s) you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item * The L<documentation mailing list|maillist::list-docs-dev>

=back

=head1 Authors

=over

=item * Doug MacEachern

=back

Only the major authors are listed above. For contributors see the
Changes file.

=head1 See Also

Apache(3), mod_perl(3)

=cut
