=head1 NAME

The mod_perl Mailing List Guidelines

=head1 Description

Ninety percent of the questions asked on the List have already been
asked before, and answers will be found at one of the links below.
Before you post to the mod_perl List, please read the following.
Hopefully it will save you (and everyone else) some time.

Except where noted the language of all documents is English.

=head1 What is mod_perl?

See the L<mod_perl Guide|docs::1.0::guide::intro>.

=head1 What you need to know to be able to use mod_perl

You need to know about Apache, CGI and of course about Perl itself.
This document explains where to find more information about these and
related topics.

If you already have Perl on your machine then it's likely that you
already have all the Perl documentation.  Try typing `perldoc perldoc'
and `man perl'.


=head1 How To Get Help With mod_perl Itself

Please read the sections on L<getting help with mod_perl
1.x|docs::1.0::guide::help> or L<getting help with mod_perl
2.x|docs::2.0::user::help::help>, depending on what version 
you are using.

=head2 Documentation which comes with the distribution

Read the documents which came with mod_perl, particularly the ones
named INSTALL, README and SUPPORT.  Also read the documents to which
they refer.  Read all the relevant documentation about your operating
system, any tools you use such as compilers and databases, and about
the Apache Web server.

You will get a much better response from the mod_perl List if you can
show that you have made the effort of reading the documentation.


=head2 Other documentation

There are dozens of references to many authoritative resources in the
L<Offsite Resources|docs::offsite::index> section.

=head1 How to get on (and off!) the mod_perl mailing list

=head2 To Get On The List

There are two stages to getting on the list.  Firstly you have to send
a mail message to: modperl-subscribe@perl.apache.org and wait for
receiving a response from the mail server with instructions to
proceed.

Secondly you have to do what it says in the instructions.  After you
are subscribed you will receive a messsage with lots of useful
information about the List.  Read it.  Print it, even.  Save a copy of
it.  You B<can> get another copy of it, but then you'll feel silly.

Traffic on the mod_perl list can be high at times, several hundred
posts per week, so you might want to consider subscribing to the
mod_perl digest list as an alternative to the mod_perl list. To do so,
send an email to modperl-digest-subscribe@perl.apache.org instead.


=head2 To Get Off The List

Instructions on how to unsubscribe are posted in the headers of every
message which you receive from the List.  All you have to do is send a
message to: modperl-unsubscribe@perl.apache.org (or
modperl-digest-unsubscribe@perl.apache.org if you are on the digest
list)

To prevent malicious individuals from unsubscribing other people, the
mailing list software insists that the message requesting that an
email address be unsubscribed comes from that same address.  If your
email address has changed you can still unsubscribe, but you will need
to read the help document, which can be recieved by sending an empty
email to: modperl-help@perl.apache.org


=head1 To post to the List

I<Posting> to the list is just sending a message to the address which
you will be given after you subscribe.

Your message will not be accepted unless you have first L<To Get On
The List|maillist::list-modperl>.

Do not post to modperl-subscribe@perl.apache.org, except to subscribe
to the list!  Please do not post to the list itself to attempt to
unsubscribe from it.


=head2 Private Mail

Please do not send private mail to list members unless it is
invited. Even if they have answered your question on the list, you
should continue the discussion on the list.

On the other hand, if someone replies to you personally, you shouldn't
forward the reply to the list unless you have received permission from
this person.


=head2 Other Tips


=head3 Read The Documentation

Please read as much of the documentation as you can before posting.
Please also try to see if your question has been asked recently, there
are links to searchable archives of the list on the mod_perl home page
http://perl.apache.org/.


=head3 Give Full Information

Don't forget that the people reading the list have no idea even what
operating system your computer runs unless you tell them.  When
reporting problems include at least the information requested in the
document entitled I<SUPPORT> which you will find in the mod_perl
source distribution.

You can find many excellent examples of posts with good supporting
information by looking at the mod_perl mailing list archives.  There
are URLs for several archives (with several different search engines)
on the mod_perl home page.  Followup posts will show you how easy the
writer made it for the person who replied to deduce the problem and to
suggest a way of solving it, or to find some further item information.

If after reading the I<SUPPORT> document you think that more
information is needed for your particular problem, but you still don't
know what information to give, ask on the list rather than sending
long scripts and configuration files which few people will have the
time to read.


=head3 Error Messages

If you include error messages in your post, make sure that they are
EXACTLY the messages which you saw.  Use a text editor to transfer
them directly into your message if you can.  Try not to say things
like "the computer said something about not recognizing a command" but
instead to say something like this:

"When logged in as root I typed the command:

  httpd -X

at the console and on the console I saw the message

  Syntax error on line 393 of /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf: Invalid
  command 'PerlHandler', perhaps mis-spelled or defined by a module
  not included in the server configuration [FAILED]"


=head3 The Subject Line

The I<Subject:> line is B<very> important.  Choose an B<informative>
I<Subject> line for the mail header.  Busy list members will skip
messages with unclear I<Subject> lines.


=head3 Preserve The Threads

Messages which all have the same I<Subject> line text (possibly
preceded by the word "Re:" which is automatically added by your
mailer) are together known as a "thread".  List members and mail
archive use mail unique-ids and/or the Subject line to sort mail.  Do
not change the text without a very good reason, because this may break
the thread.  Breaking the thread makes it difficult to follow the
discussion and can be very confusing.  It may be better to start a new
thread than to continue an old one if you change the theme.


=head3 Post in PLAIN TEXT

Do not post in HTML.  Microsoft users in particular should take
careful note of this.  Use either the US-ASCII or ISO-8859-1 (Latin-1)
character set, do not use other character sets which may be designed
for those who do not speak English and which may not be displayable on
many terminals.  If you ignore this advice then the chances are
greater that your message will not be read.


=head3 Time and Bandwidth

Remember that thousands of people may read your messages.  To save
time and to keep badwidth usage to a minimum, please keep posts
reasonably short, but please make it clear precisely what you are
asking.  If you can, send a B<small> example of a script or
configuration which reproduces your problem.  Please do not send long
scripts which cannot easily be understood.  Please do not send large
attachments of many kilobytes, if they are needed then put them on the
Web somewhere or say in your message that you can send them separately
if they are requested.


=head3 Tags

It can be helpful if you use a C<[tag]> in square brackets in the
I<Subject:> line, as well as the brief description of your post.

Some suggested tags are:

  ADMIN		Stuff about running the List.
  
  ADVOCACY	Promoting the use of mod_perl, printing T-shirts, stuff like
		that.  Please don't start another discussion about whether we
		should put this on a different list, we've been there before.
  
  ANNOUNCE	Announcements of new software tools, packages and updates.
  
  BENCHMARK	Apache/mod_perl performance issues.
  
  BUG		Report of possible fault in mod_perl or associated software
		- it's better if you can send a patch instead!
  
  DBI		Stuff generally concerning Apache/mod_perl interaction
		with databases.
  
  FYI		For information only.
  
  JOB		Any post about mod_perl jobs is welcome as long as it is
		brief and to the point.  Note: Not "JOBS".
  
  MASON		Jonathan Swartz' implementation of Perl embedded in HTML.
  
  NEWS		Items of news likely to be interesting to mod_perlers.
  
  OT	        Off-topic items, please try to keep traffic low.
  
  PATCH		Suggested fix for fault in mod_perl or associated software.
  
  QUESTION	Questions about mod_perl which is not covered by one of the
		more specific headings.
  
  RareModules	Occasional reminders about little-used modules on CPAN.
  
  RFC		Requests for comment from the mod_perl community.
  
  SITE		Things about running the Apache/mod_perl servers.
  
  SUMMARY	After investigation and perhaps fixing a fault, and after an
		extended discussion of a specific topic, it is helpful if
		someone summarizes the thread.  Don't be shy, everyone will
		appreciate the effort.
  
  mod_perl2     As currently both versions of mod_perl are beeing supported
  or            on the same list, adding a tag to specifiy which version you
  mp2           are talking about might be a good idea. 

If you can't find a tag which fits your subject, don't worry.  If you
have a very specific subject to discuss, feel free to choose your own
tag, for example C<[mod_proxy]> or C<[Perl Sections]> but remember
that the main reasons for the I<Subject> line are to save people time
and to improve the response to your posts.  It does not matter whether
you use C<[UPPER CASE]> or C<[lower case]> or even a C<[Mixture Of
Both]> in the tag.  Try to keep the tag short.  The tag should be the
first thing in the I<Subject> line.


=head3 If You Don't Get a Reply

Sometimes you will not get a reply.  Try to be patient, but it is OK
to try again after a few days.  Sometimes the replies you get will be
very short.  Please do not worry about that.  People are very busy,
that's all.

Of course if your post is C<[OT]> for the list then you may not get a
reply, or you may get one telling you to try a different forum.


=head3 If You Don't Understand a Reply

Just say so.


=head3 General Perl and Apache questions

The mod_perl list is NOT for general questions about Apache and the
Perl language.  The majority view is tolerant of off-topic posts, but
it is considered impolite to post general Perl and Apache questions on
the mod_perl list.  The best you can hope for is a private reply and a
polite reminder that the question is off-topic for this list.  If you
catch someone on a bad day, you might not get the best.  There are
often bad days in software development departments...

If the Perl and Apache documentation has not answered your question
then you could try looking at http://lists.perl.org/ or one of the
comp.lang.* newsgroups.  From time to time there are efforts to start
a dedicated Perl mailing list and these usually result in a message or
two on the mod_perl list, so it might be worth your while to search
the archives.

Please note that there are now separate mailing lists for ASP, EmbPerl
and Mason, but although we keep trying to get a separate list off the
ground for I<Advocacy> it always seems to end up back on the mod_perl
list.


=head1 Replying to posts


=head2 The "Subject:" line

Make sure that you include the exact I<Subject:> from the original
post, unmodified.  This makes it much easier for people (and for the
mail software) to deal with the mail.  If you must change the subject
line then please append the words "was originally" plus the original
subject line to your new subject line so that folks can see what is
going on.


=head2 Extracts From Other Posts

When replying to a post, please include B<short> excerpts from the
post to which you are replying so that others can follow the
conversation without having to wade through reams of superfluous text.
If you are lazy about this then messages can get very long indeed and
can become a burden to the other people who might be trying to help.
Make sure that there is a clear distinction between the text(s) of the
message(s) to which you are replying and your reply itself.


=head2 Unnecessary Duplication

If you know that the intended recipients are subscribed to the List,
there is no need to send messages both to them and to the list.  They
will get more than one copy of the message which is wasteful.


=head2 Private replies

It is helpful to keep most of your replies on the list, so that others
see that help is being given and so they do not waste time on problems
which have already been solved.  Where it is appropriate to take a
discussion off the list (for example where it veers off-topic, as
often happens), say so in a message so that everyone is aware of it.


=head2 Flames

The readers of the mod_perl List aren't interested in that kind of
thing.  Don't get involved.


=head1 The mod_perl Guide

You absolutely B<must> read the mod_perl Guide.

It is a large document, you probably will want to download it and read
it off-line.  If you get the source (see below, L<Corrections and
Contributions|/Corrections_and_Contributions>) it comes with a 
build file to turn the .pod (Plain Old Documentation) source into
HTML, .ps (PostScript) and .pdf (Portable Document Format).  You will
need at least Perl version 5.005 to build it.  If you browse the Guide
on-line you can use one of the search engines to find things in it.
If you build and browse your own local HTML copy of the Guide, some of
the links in it will not work unless you are connected to the
Internet.  Some people prefer to work offline, using tools like `grep'
or `mc' to search the .pod source directly.


=head2 Finding the Guide

Simply go to the L<mod_perl Guide|docs::1.0::guide::index>.

=head2 Corrections and Contributions

META: this needs to be corrected when the new site is released!

Corrections and additions to the Guide are welcome.  The original is
kept in .pod format, and it is converted to other formats by Perl
code.  The Guide changes rather frequently (the CVS snapshot is
updated every six hours!) so if you want to make a contribution make
sure that you get the latest version of the Guide source from the cvs
repository:

  % cvs -d ":pserver:anoncvs@cvs.apache.org:/home/cvspublic" login

password: "anoncvs".

  % cvs -d ":pserver:anoncvs@cvs.apache.org:/home/cvspublic" co modperl-docs

The guide's in the I<src/docs/1.0/guide> directory.

Please make your changes to the .pod source only and then post the
output of

  % cvs diff -u filename(s)

ot the whole modified files to the L<modperl-docs mailing
list|maillist::list-docs-dev>.

=cut
