Name: Stas Bekman
Email: stas@stason.org
URL: http://www.stason.org/
Image: stas-bekman.jpg
Summary: Documentation, modules, mod_perl 2.0 contributions, book, articles

Stas has started contributing to mod_perl in 1998 by creating the mini
<a href="http://perl.apache.org/docs/1.0/guide/">mod_perl guide</a>,
simply to reduce the rate of broken record questions on the mod_perl
list. After a few years, some people still referred to the guide as
mini, while it contained more than 600 pages at that time. As of today
more than 200 users and developers helped Stas to write, review,
improve and polish the guide.

While not working on the documentation and developing mod_perl, at the
remaining spare time, Stas has written a few Apache modules available
from <a
href="http://search.cpan.org/search?mode=author&query=Stas+Bekman">his
CPAN directory</a> and did some work on mod_perl 1.0 series.

In autumn 2001 <a href="http://www.ticketmaster.com">Ticket Master</a>
has kindly sponsored Stas for one year to help with mod_perl. Stas
used this time to help with the development of mod_perl 2.0, to lead
the creation of the new perl.apache.org site, to advocate mod_perl via
articles in popular online zines and conferences, to help with the
mod_perl list and as usual to write a lot of documentation, mainly for
mod_perl 2.0.

In autumn 2002 <a href="http://www.ticketmaster.com">Ticket Master</a>
has extended the sponsorship for one more year, and the following year
has done it again. As Doug MacEachern has shifted his focus on other
things at the fall of 2002, Stas took the lead to continue the
development of mod_perl 2.0, greatly assisted by Geoffrey Young,
Philippe M. Chiasson and other developers.

In 2003 Stas had the luxury to be sponsored by <a
href="http://www.ticketmaster.com">Ticket Master</a> for yet another
1.5 years (making it a total of 3.5 years), at the end of which Stas
has started the phase out process, opening the opportunity for other
developers to take over the lead of the project.

Stas has co-authored <a href="http://modperlbook.org/">Practical
mod_perl</a> with Eric Cholet, published by O'Reilly and Associates in
May 2003.

And of course, since 1998, when Stas discovered for himself mod_perl,
he was finding ways to use it at work, even while doing x86 hardware
development and verification at Intel. He is now thinking about
mod_perl 3.0's architecture, hopefully to be implemented solely with
AND and OR gates, driven by the Perl 6.0 chipset for the best
performance. Don't be surprised when you get offered a shiny Bluetooth
PCI card with embedded mod_perl when you shop for your new server
machine.
