=head1 NAME

Apache/Perl Modules

=head1 Description

On CPAN you will be able to find a number of Perl modules created to
run under mod_perl. We will give a presentation of them here and ways
to get at these modules.

Apache/Perl modules are somewhat different from the many others found
on CPAN (http://www.cpan.org/).  Most Perl modules are "building
blocks"; developers use them to build applications or even more
building blocks.  It just so happens that Apache/Perl modules are
encapsulted inside a namespace and I<.pm> file.  However, this does
not make them all building blocks, many are just like Apache modules
written in C: you install them, edit the server configuration files
and you're done.

Before you start a new module, consider this: Apache/Perl modules are
useless outside of mod_perl and Apache.  Do your best to design such
that your C<Apache::*> module will make good use of the building
blocks found on CPAN, putting together new building blocks where
appropriate and simply glue them together with the Apache API, keeping
the C<Apache::*> modules very small.

These modules will also serve as good examples, showing you where
modules can step in during a stage of a request with C<Perl*Handler>
callbacks.  You'll also see how and when to use the Apache API
methods.


=head1 The Module List

Like other CPAN modules, the Apache/Perl modules are listed on the
Perl module list, under the I<World Wide Web> category:
http://www.cpan.org/modules/00modlist.long.html#ID15_WorldWideW
. Browse down the page to find the C<Apache::> modules, organized by
their role in the requets cycle.

=head1 Where Are The Modules Kept?

Modules listed with the B<APML> as is contact are part of the mod_perl
distribution package.  Other modules can be found on CPAN in the
http://www.cpan.org/modules/by-module/Apache/ directory.  If they have
not made it to CPAN yet, they might be found in the mod_perl
I<contrib> directory at http://perl.apache.org/dist/contrib/.
Otherwise, feel free to ask the contact author or the list how you can
go about getting your hands on a copy. The modules listed with B<MPB>
as the author were present in the I<Writing Apache Modules with Perl
and C> book by Lincoln Stein and Doug MacEachern. If you can't find
these modules on CPAN, look for them at
http://modperl.com:9000/book/source/.

=head1 Playing Your Part

Apache and Perl are world-wide collaborative efforts; naturally, the
Apache/Perl integration project is the same.  You've started on the
right foot simply by reading this document, thanks! Please make sure
you've read the main Perl module list at
http://www.cpan.org/modules/00modlist.long.html, all that is said
there is relevant here!

If you wish to share your module(s) in the Perl way, by putting them
on CPAN, send a request to modules@perl.org to get set up with a PAUSE
user id and directory. See http://www.cpan.org/modules/04pause.html
for more details.

B<HINT>:  For a nice set of template files try this:

  % h2xs -AX -n Apache::YourPackageName

=head2 Module Naming Conventions

Like for normal Perl modules on CPAN, the C<Apache::> namespace
conventionally used for mod_perl modules needs to keep a certain
organization. This is why you should choose a multi-level name for
your module, categorizing it into a namespace that you feel fits your
module. There should be a very good reason for a module to not have a
nested name (ie. living directly under C<Apache::>), that should only
be the case for the core API modules and older modules which may keep
their names.

Here are some examples of namespaces that you may want to use:

  Apache::App      Applications: any module serving content with a
                   point-and-click interface *
  
  Apache::Auth     Modules related to general user authentication/authorization
 
  Apache::Authen   Modules solely related to authentication
  
  Apache::Authz    Solely related to authorization
  
  Apache::Access   Only access control
  
  Apache::Config   Configuration-related things
  
  Apache::Devel    Development-related modules (debug/devel help)
  
  Apache::Filter   Filtering modules
    ::Output       Output filters (1.0 style Filter/OutputChain or 2.0 style)
    ::Input        Input filters
  
  Apache::Framework  Modules providing application frameworks (templating
                     and/or publication frameworks) *
  
  Apache::Log      Logging modules
  
  Apache::Method   Method handlers (PATCH/PUT and the like)
  
  Apache::MIME     MIME-type modules
  
  Apache::Monitor  Monitoring modules
  
  Apache::Persistent  Modules providing for persistency in connections
  
  Apache::Proxy    Proxies
  
  Apache::RPC      RPC/SOAP modules
  
  Apache::Trans    URI Translation handlers
  
  Apache::Util     General-utility modules, usually not handlers but
                   providing an API to use in your code

C<*>: If you are writing a small application or templating module,
contained in one module, you can use these namespaces. However, if you
are planning a substantial framework with many inter-related modules,
you should probably go with a top-level namespace outside of
C<Apache::>.

For an illustration of how this would look for the older modules, you
can look at this L<example
categorization|products::old-modules-categorized>.

B<Note:> I<Of course> none of these categories are cast in stone: you
should feel free to choose the module name that suits your module best
instead of trying to follow these general indications. If in doubt,
just ask around at the mod_perl list; you are sure to get some
assistance in naming your module! Furthermore, you should look at the
way it's done on CPAN, and apply it under the C<Apache::> namespace.

=head1 Porting CPAN modules to mod_perl 2.0 Status

If you want to port your or someone else's module to mod_perl 2.0,
please refer to the these documents: L<porting Perl modules to
mod_perl 2.0|docs::2.0::user::porting::porting> and L<mod_perl 1.0
compatibility reference|docs::2.0::user::porting::compat>.

=head2 Ported 3rd-party Modules

The following modules have already been ported to mod_perl 2.0 and are
available from CPAN. If you know of other modules that have been
ported but not listed here, please contact L<the modperl
list|maillist::modperl>, so we can update this information:

  CGI
  CGI::Cookie
  Apache::Peek
  Apache::AuthNetLDAP
  Apache::AuthzNetLDAP
  Apache::Clean

=head1 Porting in Process

The following modules are in the process of being ported to mod_perl
2.0. Please contact the porter if you wish to help the porting.

If you have started the porting, in order to avoid duplicated efforts
please contact L<the modperl
list|maillist::modperl>, and let us know what module you are porting.
This information should also help others to help you to do the porting
and testing.

  Module                     Porters
  ----------------------------------
  Apache::MP3                Stas Bekman <stas AT stason.org>
                             Clemens Schrimpe <csch AT Kiez.NET>
  Apache::Scoreboard         Stas Bekman <stas AT stason.org>
  Apache::VMonitor           Stas Bekman <stas AT stason.org>
  Apache::AuthPerLDAP        Shannon Eric Peevey <speeves AT unt.edu>


=head1 Maintainers

The maintainer is the person you should contact with updates,
corrections and patches.

=over

=item *

Per Einar Ellefsen E<lt>pereinar (at) oslo.online.noE<gt>

=back

=head1 Authors

=over

=item *

Per Einar Ellefsen E<lt>pereinar (at) oslo.online.noE<gt>

=item *

Doug MacEachern

=back

=cut
